# BOOK REVIEW 

John Christman and Joel Anderson, eds., Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2005. 383 pp. ISBN 0-521-83951-3, US $\$ 85$ (Hb).

Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism is an excellent collection of essays that significantly advances theoretical debates about autonomy within moral psychology, action theory and liberal political philosophy. As John Christman and Joel Anderson state in their introduction, a range of debates in liberal political theory, for example concerning the virtues and capabilities that are required of citizens in a democratic polity, the basis for multicultural rights, and conceptions of public reason and democratic deliberation, are underpinned by conceptions of citizens as self-governing agents and by the view that, at a minimum, a role of the state is to protect the interests of citizens in leading self-governing lives. However, such debates have proceeded to some extent independently of debates within moral psychology and action theory concerning the meaning of autonomy and the capacities necessary for autonomous agency.

One of Christman and Anderson's main aims is to initiate a dialogue between these different debates and to explore issues that intersect them. For example, discussions within moral psychology and action theory concerning whether the role of critical reflection in securing autonomy should be understood procedurally or as involving more substantive value commitments overlap with debates within liberal theory concerning state neutrality versus perfectionism. Similarly, the development of social or relational approaches to autonomy is motivated by similar concerns as critiques of the individualism of traditional liberal conceptions of the person, while an increasing rejection by philosophers of an overly rationalist, unified, and integrated conception of the autonomous self parallels concerns about how to achieve social unity in modern polities marked by diversity, internal disagreement, and value conflict. Although not all of the essays in Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism engage directly with questions at the intersection of these different debates, each essay is challenging and thought provoking in its own right and there is sufficient cross-referencing and dialogue among contributors to enable the
volume as a whole to succeed in realizing Christman and Anderson's overall aim. In addition, several of the essays, particularly the essays by Joel Anderson and Axel Honneth, John Christman, Gerald Gaus and Jeremy Waldron, do address such questions directly and in illuminating ways.

Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism is divided into four parts. The essays in the first part, by Diana Meyers, J. David Velleman and Marina A.L. Oshana, explore the relationship between conceptions of selfhood, identity and autonomy, addressing in particular the vexed question of authenticity, or what makes a person's desires, values and commitments her own. In her essay, "Decentralizing Autonomy: Five Faces of Selfhood," Meyers seeks to articulate the importance to autonomy competence of skills arising from the relational, social, embodied, and psychodynamic aspects of human selfhood. In doing so, she explicitly aims to shift the focus of theoretical reflection on autonomy from the preoccupation with rational reflection that characterizes much action theory, arguing instead for a richer conception of practical intelligence that is better attuned to the multiple dimensions of selfhood. Meyers's decentered approach to selfhood contrasts with the approach of Velleman. In his inventive essay, "The Self as Narrator," which is an extended response to Daniel Dennett's conception of the self as a fictive center of narrative gravity, Velleman argues that although the process of self-narration is a process whereby we invent the selves that we thereby enact, this process discloses a real self or inner locus of agential control: the narrating self or the unifying self of autonomous agency. In her essay, "Autonomy and Self-Identity," Oshana develops themes from her earlier work on the social constitution of autonomy in a discussion of the ways in which social scripts with which we may not identify, such as scripts pertaining to racial identity, might nevertheless be inescapably incorporated into our self-conceptions and compromise autonomy. Oshana raises important questions about the extent to which autonomy requires authenticity, whether understood as identification with, or non-alienation from, our practical identity.

The essays in the second part of Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism, by Paul Benson, Joel Anderson and Axel Honneth, and Marilyn Friedman, highlight the importance of interpersonal relationships and broader social structures, not only for the development of autonomy but also in its constitution. In his essay, "Taking Ownership: Authority and Voice in Autonomous Agency," Benson argues against conceptions of autonomy that ground agents' ownership and authority with respect to their intentions and actions in the expression of their practical identities. Such identity-based views, he argues, face difficulties
explaining the autonomy of agents whose practical identities are authentically conflicted, as well as the intrinsically social dimensions of autonomy. In his alternative analysis, Benson grounds autonomy in an agent's sense of her own authority to be accountable and answerable for her actions, motives and values. Because the attitudes of agents toward their own authority to be accountable and answerable are structured by their interpersonal relationships and social situations, Benson argues that his view is better able than identity-based views to account for the ways in which oppressive social relationships and conditioning might impair autonomy.

In their essay, "Autonomy, Vulnerability, Recognition, and Justice," Anderson and Honneth take up the claim that "autonomy is vulnerable to disruptions in one's relationship to others" in the context of a theory of social recognition (p. 130). Like Benson, they argue that autonomy involves certain affective attitudes towards ourselves, in particular attitudes of self-trust, self-respect, and self-esteem, and that such attitudes arise from intersubjective processes of mutual recognition. This is why agents' capacities for autonomy are vulnerable in contexts of injustice and social exclusion, and why such autonomy-related vulnerabilities give rise to specific claims of social justice, distinct from redistributive claims, for social inclusion and recognition within the basic institutions of society. Friedman's contribution, "Autonomy and Male Dominance," is focused specifically on women's vulnerability to compromised autonomy in contexts of male domination. She argues that in such contexts the promotion of women's autonomy is crucial to the social realization of the moral equality of all persons.

Two main sets of issues emerge from the essays in the first two parts of Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism. One set of issues concerns the relationship between identity, authenticity, and autonomy. To what extent is autonomous agency bound up with self-expression and if it is, how should we understand the self that is thereby expressed? How unified and integrated must agents be to count as autonomous and what degree of self-understanding or self-knowledge is required for autonomy? While some kind of capacity for self-reflection seems to be necessary for autonomy, should this capacity be construed primarily as a rational capacity or does it also involve certain affective, imaginative and bodily skills? The contributors answer these questions in different ways, but one theme that is common to the essays by Meyers, Oshana, Benson, and Anderson and Honneth, as well as to Christman's contribution in Part Four, is that any plausible approach to analyzing autonomy must allow us to recognize that as agents our motives are often not transparent to us and that our identities involve multiple, sometimes conflicting strands.

Such recognition requires moving beyond any conception of autonomy that assumes a unified, integrated, self-transparent conception of the self. To the extent that as agents we achieve some degree of unity, selfunderstanding, and integration, this is achieved as a result of an active process of managing inner conflict and negotiating the different strands of our identities.

This conception of autonomous agency opens up a number of distinct, but overlapping, areas for further investigation. Meyers and Velleman characterize this active process in narrative terms, raising the question of how to understand the relationship between narrative identity and autonomous agency. Oshana and Benson argue that autonomy is consistent with sometimes accepting the inescapability of conflicts between different strands of identity, and perhaps some degree of self-alienation. Even if this view is plausible, it nevertheless raises the question of how to distinguish authentically ambivalent identities from the kinds of inner conflict and ambivalence that compromise autonomy, especially in contexts of oppressive social relationships and conditioning. A number of contributors emphasize that the process of autonomous self-management involves not only rational capacities, but also affective attitudes and nonconscious mental processes. There is much work still to be done to articulate in more detail this richer, more extended conception of reflection. The contribution by Meyers is singular in identifying embodiment as an important dimension of selfhood and as a source of specific skills of practical intelligence. An interesting line of further investigation would be to develop this notion of practical intelligence in light of recent work on embodied cognition in philosophy of mind and cognitive science.

The second set of issues raised by the essays in the first two parts of Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism concerns how best to characterize the relational and social dimensions of autonomy. Is autonomy social in a casual or constitutive sense? Which kinds of social relationships and structures foster autonomy and which are inimical to it? If autonomy is a constitutively social capacity, does the state have specific obligations not merely to protect but also to promote the autonomy of the vulnerable? Benson, and Anderson and Honneth, in particular, make interesting and important contributions to ongoing discussions in the literature concerning such issues. Benson's essay provides a persuasive framework for understanding the sense in which autonomy is constitutively and not merely causally social. His analysis of the structure of interpersonal and social normative expectations within which our agency is embedded seems correct, although perhaps this analysis cannot entirely replace, but rather supplements, the more standard accounts of autonomy that articulate authenticity conditions in terms of actions, motives, and values that express
an agent's practical identity. Similarly while Benson seems correct to hold that first personal authority should not be construed in terms of privileged epistemic access, Christman and other contributors rightly emphasize that in order to give voice to her reasons for action an autonomous agent must be capable, to some degree, of reflecting upon, understanding, and expressing her point of view, values, and interests.

In their essay, Anderson and Honneth provide a particularly fruitful analysis of the relational and social dimensions of autonomy. Honneth's theory of mutual recognition is less well known by analytical philosophers than it should be. Anderson and Honneth use Honneth's theory not only to extend previous work by relational theorists on the affectively laden self-conceptions necessary for autonomy, but also to show why, give the dependence of agents' self-conceptions on intersubjective structures of recognition, a concern to foster the autonomy of vulnerable individuals cannot adequately be met by a theory of social justice, such as John Rawls's theory, that is focused solely on rights and the redistribution of material resources. Their essay opens up an important area of further investigation concerning the implications of relational and social approaches to autonomy for debates within liberalism concerning neutrality and perfectionism, and for debates concerning the relationship between redistribution and recognition.

The essays in the third and fourth parts of Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism, by Richard Dagger, Joseph Heath, Rainer Forst, Bert van den Brink, Gerald Gaus, Jeremy Waldron, and John Christman, are focused on the role of autonomy in the justification of liberal principles and in conceptions of political legitimacy and public reason. There are interesting connections between a number of these essays and some of the issues discussed in the first two parts of the volume. One such connection is between the notion of mutual recognition and van den Brink's analysis of what he calls civic endurance and civic responsiveness, as social virtues required of citizens in modern societies marked by disagreement. In his essay, "Liberalism Without Agreement: Political Autonomy and Agonistic Citizenship," van den Brink argues that in liberal democratic societies it is members of cultural, social, and political minorities who are most likely to be required to shoulder the burdens of endurance; to be required to engage cooperatively and constructively in a political community in which they might be marginalized, and whose governing principles and concrete social policies they might not endorse. For the claims of marginalized groups to be heard, citizens in privileged social positions must develop dispositions for civic responsiveness, a willingness to recognize that their own beliefs and ideals may be contested and that the civic order may not be sufficiently responsive to the legitimate needs of
people in less fortunate, or dominant, social positions. Civic endurance and responsiveness seem to fall short of the ideal of mutual recognition, raising the question of whether van den Brink would regard these virtues as the kinds of dispositions that need to be cultivated in citizens in order to bring about a more just, mutually recognitive, basic social structure or, less optimistically, as the closest we are likely to get to mutual recognition in social contexts marked by disagreement.

Another connection concerns how to understand the relationship between personal and moral autonomy. Liberal theorists and theorists of autonomy have typically drawn a sharp distinction between these concepts. Liberals have insisted that the justification for liberalism is the protection of personal autonomy, rather than any substantive conception of moral autonomy, while theorists of autonomy have been keen to distinguish the character ideal of personal autonomy from dubious metaphysical views about free will. Forst, Gaus and Waldron all challenge this sharp distinction. In his essay, "Political Liberty: Integrating Five Conceptions of Autonomy," Forst usefully distinguishes five conceptions of individual autonomy that are presupposed by the notion of political liberty: moral, ethical, legal, political and social. He argues that a conception of moral autonomy, according to which every person has a "basic right to justification," a right to "be respected as an autonomous author and addressee of moral claims" and to demand that the actions of others must be justifiable according to criteria of reciprocity and generality, is fundamental to political liberty (p. 231). Gaus, in his essay "The Place of Autonomy within Liberalism," argues similarly that what he refers to as the fundamental liberal principle, that an interference with liberty must be justified on the basis of public moral reasons that all rational agents can recognize, presupposes a substantive, Kantian conception of moral autonomy, as the capacity of rational agents to freely will moral principles. Gaus argues that this conception of moral autonomy does not rest on a commitment to a thicker perfectionist conception of personal autonomy as self-realization or self-authorship. It only requires that morally autonomous agents are minimally self-directed, in the sense that their actions are determined by their own deliberations. Nevertheless the liberal principle does require that citizens are sufficiently self-reflective to be able to distinguish what counts as a reason from the perspective of their personal substantive moral commitments, from public moral reasons that can be shared by all. While liberal citizens might thus unreflectively embrace traditional, customary, or religious ways of life, they must be sufficiently self-reflective to recognize that the reasons provided by such ways of life are not public reasons, and therefore that the public world must be a secular world.

Gaus's analysis certainly helps to explain why citizens in liberal democracies must develop the dispositions for civic endurance and civic responsiveness discussed by van den Brink, and his argument that liberalism presupposes a Kantian conception of moral autonomy is persuasive. However it is not clear that Gaus's optimism about the capacities of citizens in liberal societies to walk the tightrope he describes between private religious reasons and public secular reasons is justified, nor that he has an adequate response to the perfectionist claim that an ultra-minimal conception of personal autonomy is insufficient to develop the civic virtues and capacities for self-reflection that are required of citizens in liberal societies marked by disagreement.

In his illuminating essay "Moral Autonomy and Personal Autonomy," Waldron also questions the extent to which liberals can distinguish between a private, individual conception of the good and submission to a public conception of the right. Waldron argues that the kind of capacities for self-reflection and self-control required by a Kantian account of the duty to promote the pursuit of individual happiness and by contemporary accounts of personal autonomy, are the same kinds of capacities as the capacities required for moral autonomy, or submission of the will to the right. The continuity between personal and moral autonomy is not just a matter of form, however, but also of evaluative substance, since it is not only perfectionists like Joseph Raz who conceive of autonomy as an individual's engagement with the good. For any liberal view that links personal autonomy to the good, the choice between different ways of life is not just a choice between mere desires or preferences, but a normative choice that expresses the person's conception of the kind of life she ought to lead and what it is right for her to do. Thus the question arises "whether the phenomenon that the liberal describes as forming and pursuing a conception of the good can be kept apart from the phenomenology of experiencing and responding to moral demands" (p. 324). The dilemma Waldron poses is that to insist on an overly sharp distinction between personal and moral autonomy makes it difficult to explain how the pursuit of personal autonomy can be amenable to moral demands; however, if the distinction between personal and moral autonomy is dissolved, liberalism's commitment to pluralism with respect to the good seems to result in a problematic pluralism with respect to the right.

The final essay in Autonomy and the Limits of Liberalism, "Autonomy, Self-Knowledge, and Liberal Legitimacy," by John Christman, is particularly helpful in developing connections between liberal conceptions of political legitimacy and debates within moral psychology concerning the conditions for autonomous agency, the nature of the autonomous self, and the kind of self-reflection that is required for autonomy. Christman's
concern is with articulating the sense in which citizens should be conceived of as autonomous agents with the authority to represent themselves in political dialogue and public deliberation. The background to Christman's concern is twofold. The liberal conception of political legitimacy, at least as understood within the Kantian tradition of Rawls and Jurgen Habermas, is based on a notion of respect for the moral powers of citizens rationally to reflect upon, deliberate about, and endorse, public principles of justice and the conceptions of value under which they live their lives. This notion of persons as objects of respect is also based on the assumption that, in a context of value pluralism, citizens are capable of empathic respect for others and committed to respectfully engaging with the different perspectives of other citizens, and that they are capable of reflecting upon and expressing their own value commitments. However, for reasons discussed by the contributors to the first two parts of Autonomy and the Challenges to Liberalism, it is no longer feasible naively to assume that the values and motives of agents are transparently disclosed in self-reflection or that our reflective judgments about ourselves are always accurate. In what sense then can citizens be taken to have representative authority with respect to their perspectives? In answering this question Christman makes an important distinction between an epistemic and a personal conception of self-representative authority. Under the epistemic conception, persons have the authority to represent their perspectives in public deliberation because they know themselves best. The personal conception, which Christman endorses, is based not on the epistemic authority of persons, which is questionable, but on their taking responsibility for, or public commitment to, the views that they express. Christman's conception of the representative authority of autonomous agents is thus similar to Benson's notion of being accountable and answerable to others for our actions. Whether Christman's notion of the representative authority of agents is sufficient to answer concerns about the shaping of individual preferences by oppressive social forces and the manipulation of public opinion by powerful interests is a further question.

Catriona Mackenzie<br>Philosophy Department<br>Macquarie University<br>Sydney, NSW 2109<br>Australia

