# Normative Ethics and the Prospects of an Empirical Contribution to Assessment of Moral Disagreement and Moral Realism 

Andrew Sneddon

Published online: 2 June 2009

(c) Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2009

Here is a version of the familiar argument from disagreement. The successes of science are "best explained by invoking a realist understanding" of these successes. ${ }^{1}$ Moral realism is warranted only if the same pattern applies to ethics and ethical successes are best explained by invoking a realist understanding of them. One hallmark of scientific success is convergence of explanation: "scientists with quite different cultural backgrounds can typically agree in assessing scientific explanations." ${ }^{2}$ Ethics does not exhibit this hallmark of success. Instead, ethics is beset by fundamental disagreement among interlocutors who suffer from no epistemic disadvantage. On the basis of fundamental disagreement, the analogy between ethics and science is undermined: moral realism is not warranted.

This argument roughly captures an important focal point of discussion in contemporary meta-ethics. ${ }^{3}$ Over the past decade, there has been an explosion of interdisciplinary work between philosophers and psychologists about moral psychology. Working within this trend, John Doris and Alexandra Plakias have made a tentative version of the above argument on empirical grounds. ${ }^{4}$ Doris and Plakias present empirical evidence in support of the fourth premise, that ethics is[^0]\footnotetext{
A. Sneddon $(\boxtimes)$

Department of Philosophy, University of Ottawa, 70 Laurier East Street, P.O. Box 450, Stn. A, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada

e-mail: asneddon@uottawa.ca
}
beset by fundamental disagreement. They examine Richard Brandt on Hopi ethics and, especially, Richard E. Nisbett and Dov Cohen on cultures of honor to make a prima facie version of this case. ${ }^{5}$ This raises important questions. Are Doris and Plakias correct that there is even a prima facie empirical basis for moral antirealism? What sort of empirical contribution can be made to such debates in metaethics? The answers to these questions indicate that we should have reservations about the prospects of empirical contributions to the argument from disagreement. Specifically, before empirical results from psychology can be used to offer conclusions about meta-ethical issues, more careful attention must be paid to normative ethics, and especially to normative theory. There are two parts to this position. First, there is good reason to think that the evidence we currently have about moral disagreement is irrelevant to the meta-ethical debate. Second, the relevant evidence is useless for meta-ethical purposes on its own. Instead, it must be combined with normative theorizing about value pluralism.

Let us start by attending to the question of just what evidence should be thought to be relevant to the argument from disagreement. To draw either a realist or an antirealist conclusion from assessment of moral disagreement, it is necessary that the disputants in question be operating under ideal epistemic conditions. Let us consider two people who agree about some ethical issue, such as the question of the moral permissibility of abortion. To draw a realist conclusion from this phenomenon, we must be warranted in construing their opinions as responses to objective aspects of the world. If the people happen instead to share biases or tastes that are not dictated by objective features of the world, then their agreement indicates nothing about the metaphysical status of the values in question. Instead, there is more reason to take their judgments as at least akin to mere expressions of taste. The same goes for basing anti-realist conclusions on moral disagreement. To ensure that our disputants are not responding, for example, to the objective complexity of morality, we must ensure that their disagreement takes place under ideal epistemic conditions.

Just exactly what count as ideal epistemic conditions is a matter of some debate. ${ }^{6}$ However, just one aspect need concern us presently. Possession of all relevant information is generally recognized as a relatively basic constituent of the ideal epistemic situation. ${ }^{7}$ Against Plakias and Doris, who emphasize this condition for realist arguments, this is particularly the case for the anti-realist. ${ }^{8}$ Without all relevant information, we cannot distinguish fundamental disagreement from superficial disagreement borne of misunderstanding of the nature of the world.

It is dubious that this condition can literally be met. Possession of all relevant information is a very stringent condition. However, this does not mean that the[^1]argument from disagreement is futile. Generally, we can have more or less information about a given issue. For any issue, some people have more relevant information, and hence approximate more closely to ideal epistemic conditions, than others do. With regard to debate about disagreement and realism, the more information the disputants in question have about the issues, the more reason we have to suspect that disagreement is fundamental rather than superficial.

This is particularly germane to attempts to assess moral disagreement empirically. Regarding moral realism and the argument from disagreement, the lesson should be clear. We should study not just any moral disagreement. Instead, the appropriate sort of disagreement occurs between people with as much relevant information as possible. Put bluntly, empirical evidence must be collected not about ordinary people, but about moral experts. In principle this an open-ended category, not limited to ethics professors. Anyone who has taken the time to collect the relevant information and reflect on it systematically counts as a moral expert by the standards of this discussion. Ordinary people, however, often fail to meet this generous standard of moral expertise. In particular, they generally do not even remotely approach the state of possessing all relevant information about moral issues. Moral experts, by definition, are much better informed and hence come much closer to being in the relevant ideal epistemic conditions.

This approach is required if the case for moral realism is to be modeled on the case for scientific realism. The comparison of ethics and science is made explicitly throughout the version of the argument from disagreement under consideration here. The explanatory successes of science are the accomplishments of scientific experts. Questions of scientific realism pertain first and foremost to the sorts of things postulated in the explanation of, for example, expert biologists and physicists. The contents of naïve physics and biology, the everyday explanations of physical objects and living things that ordinary people naturally construct, are irrelevant to the assessment of scientific realism. ${ }^{9}$ Disagreements among the folk no more threaten scientific realism in general than do ordinary people's uninformed opinions about physics threaten the physicist's explanations in particular.

Paying closer attention to the analogy to science provides guidance about just what sorts of topics should be assessed empirically. Clearly, moral disagreement occurs with regard to particular moral judgments. For example, there is moral disagreement about whether abortion is permissible, or, to use an example from Doris and Plakias, about whether violence is an appropriate response to an insult. Hence, disagreement among experts about such particular judgments should be studied empirically. However, perhaps even more important are the justifications that these experts provide for their judgments. Such systematic justifications are the analogue, for present purposes, of the use of scientific theories to construct particular scientific explanations. Such justifications are the stuff of normative theory; particular judgments, or judgments about particular sorts of topics, are the focus of discussions in applied ethics. Together they constitute the domain of[^2]normative ethics. In a nutshell, to make an empirical contribution to assessment of the meta-ethical argument from disagreement, data must be collected about expert agreement and disagreement in normative ethics. This should help to clarify why the moral opinions of ordinary people fail to meet even loose standards of moral expertise. While lay people often make particular moral judgments, they often lack systematic justifications for the judgments. If studies of moral dumbfounding are to be believed, then they may have, literally, nothing to say in defense of such judgments. ${ }^{10}$

Despite this, philosophers assessing moral realism have overwhelmingly focused on moral disagreement between ordinary people, with inadequate attention to whether all relevant information is possessed. Sometimes this is the case with regard to way the analogy with science is framed. With their influential comparisons of science and ethics, both John Mackie and Gilbert Harman do this: they both compare the scientific explanations and judgments of expert scientists with the moral judgments and explanations of moral non-experts. More recently, and more importantly for present purposes, Doris and Plakias consider empirical studies of the moral judgments and explanations of non-experts. They address Brandt's examination of Hopi ethics and the work of Nisbett and Cohen on cultures of honor. These studies collect and systematize evidence about ordinary people's moral judgments and explanations in these cultures. Moral experts are not separated for distinct attention. For example, Doris and Plakias present Brandt on Hopi attitudes and practices toward animal suffering. ${ }^{11}$ The source of information about such attitudes is the ordinary Hopi people who were willing to cooperate with Brandt. For another example, Doris and Plakias examine the hypothesis of Nisbett and Cohen that certain patterns of attitudes and practices are found in cultures of honor and that such information can explain differences in the frequency of certain sorts of violent acts between the American North and South. ${ }^{12}$ Doris and Plakias examine two experiments performed by Nisbett and Cohen. In one, letters with two fabricated stories about a criminal record were sent to employers in both the North and South. In the other, an experimental subject was insulted by an experimental confederate. Further details, interesting as they are, do not matter for present purposes. The important point is that while the people studied in these experiments are not moral experts, Doris and Plakias use disagreements among the subjects as if they were relevant to the empirical assessment of moral disagreement.

There are two main lines of potential objection to the present insistence on examining moral experts to assess the argument from disagreement. First, one might resist the division between moral experts and non-experts. One form that such resistance could take would be a blanket denial that there is such a thing as moral[^3]expertise. Since there is no information that people can have in this domain, there is no substantial difference between the moral judgments and explanations of ordinary people and the moral judgments and explanations of people who study morality. This might be true, but it needs support, and in the present context, the assertion of such skepticism is question-begging. Whether there are moral truths about which people can have better or worse information is what the argument from disagreement is supposed to be used to assess.

Another form this objection could take would be a claim that, in a particular context, the ordinary people are as good as moral experts. For instance, Doris and Plakias consider whether various "defusing explanations" apply to the case of disagreement between the North and South about whether certain sorts of acts of violence were appropriate in particular cases. ${ }^{13}$ These explanations would allow us to identify some condition that defuses the disagreement, something about the disagreement that renders it superficial rather than fundamental. One of the defusing explanations they examine is whether the participants disagree about nonmoral facts. They write: "we can readily imagine that Northerners and Southerners could be in full agreement on the relevant nonmoral facts in the cases described," and they doubt that this would defuse the disagreement. ${ }^{14}$ But the details of their own discussion reveal the problem with such a position. The average person knows nothing of what Nisbett and Cohen have discovered about cultures of honor, for example, that at least some of them can be tied to herding economies, or to a history of such economies, in which the protection of portable resources had to be performed outside of the law. Crudely put, having a reputation for violence is a way for a shepherd to protect his sheep. Inasmuch as acts that threaten his reputation also threaten his livelihood in such contexts, protection of reputation, even by violence, is especially important. The attitudes and practices associated with such protection can linger once the local economy has changed, which might explain Southern attitudes about reputation. If average Southerners were to learn this, what would their attitudes about the appropriateness of violence be? We do not know, as Doris and Plakias note. ${ }^{15}$ Moral experts should have some idea of the details of the studies of cultures of honor performed by Nisbett and Cohen. Certainly such knowledge is possessed by the person who has all relevant information about this sort of case. Since we do not know whether the disagreement would persist if such people had this information, we should try to find people who do have this information and are more clearly moral experts, in order to assess empirically whether the disagreement persists. In the absence of such information, there is no empirical basis for thinking that the attitude of the average Southerner would either persist or change. Against Doris and Plakias, we should be noncommittal on the basis of such evidence, because we do not know whether the disagreement is superficial or fundamental. In effect, this amounts to admission that we do not know whether the views of the people in the study are relevant to the issue at hand, because we do not know whether their attitudes are relevantly similar to the attitudes that would be held by[^4]appropriately informed people. The data found in such studies are of unclear relevance to the argument from disagreement.

There is a third form that this objection can take. Instead of blanket skepticism about moral expertise and context-specific confidence about the knowledge of ordinary people, we might have context-specific skepticism. Perhaps for some particular topics there are no moral experts. We should recognize this as a live option, but there are three reasons against taking it as a particularly compelling vindication of studying the prospects of moral realism by using moral judgments of ordinary people. First, we should ask about the topic in question why we should think that there are no moral experts on the topic. If the answer is that there are no moral truths on the topic, then, again, the crucial question is being begged. If the answer instead appeals to some sort of contingency, such as that no one has studied and reflected upon this topic yet, then we can indeed use the current judgments of ordinary people about this topic for meta-ethical purposes, but only temporarily. As soon as the topic becomes one about which there is some expertise when the relevant study and reflection take place, then the judgments of ordinary people are no longer judgments made under the best available epistemic conditions. Finally, even if we are confident that we have found a specific topic about which moral expertise is impossible, this need not have any particular implications about other topics, about which we do indeed have moral experts. The bottom line is twofold: either we can isolate the topic from the rest and make topic-specific meta-ethical inquiries, or we can add the judgments to the data being collected from moral experts about other topics and see what the overall picture looks like.

The second sort of objection to the emphasis on studying moral experts turns on the idea that since we already know what putative moral experts think, there is no practical point to assessing what they think empirically. One possibility is that we already have well-known empirical studies of experts; another possibility is that extant studies of moral judgments and explanations include moral experts, thereby precluding need for more focused data; still another possibility is that the history of moral philosophy suffices to make clear enough the views of moral experts. ${ }^{16}$ Whichever alternative we choose, the objection might go, the thoughts of experts are old hat. If we want to make progress assessing moral disagreement, we have to turn to new information.

There seem to be no well-known empirical studies explicitly about the moral judgments and explanations of moral experts. Nor do there seem to be empirical studies which give us reason to think that the views of experts are representatively included in studies of moral views more generally. The history of moral philosophy is well-known, and it does seem to be a history of entrenched disagreement about both normative theory and applied ethics. However, we must be careful to attend to details here. With regard to the content of judgments and theories, it can be easy to overlook points of agreement given obvious disagreement. For instance, it is plausible to think that consequentialists, virtue ethicists, and deontologists could all offer accounts of the value of benevolence or a sensitivity to the needs of others that sometimes yields behavior aimed at benefiting others. The accounts would presumably differ, but it is

${ }^{16}$ See Leiter, op. cit., p. 336; see also Plakias and Doris, op. cit., pp. 345-347.
unwarranted to think that consequentialists, virtue ethicists, and deontologists would not agree at all. The disagreement would likely be at least partly about how certain values are related: a consequentialist might cast the effects on others as primary and the development of character traits as secondary, while a virtue ethicist might reverse this order or make the two equally fundamental. Here we have a complex blend of agreement and disagreement, and this must be accurately described in order to make progress with the argument from disagreement. Such description is an apt topic for empirical study of the beliefs of moral experts. Suffice it to say that, at present, we have no such studies of exact points of agreement and disagreement among experts in normative ethics.

Let us turn to the second part of the present position. Let us suppose that we had good empirical data about actual moral experts and that it did show widespread, persistent disagreement. What meta-ethical conclusions would be warranted on the basis of such data? The answer is simple: none. Empirical data showing persistent disagreement among moral experts would, by itself, provide not even a prima facie basis for drawing anti-realist conclusions about morality.

By itself, this point is unremarkable. To address the topics that interest philosophers, empirical findings must be philosophically situated, and this requires supplementing the findings with philosophical argument. For the version of the argument from disagreement being assessed here, such situating will require, at the very least, shedding some light on so-called fundamental disagreement, as opposed to superficial disagreement. If the present arguments so far have been correct, collecting data about the judgments and reflective thought of moral experts is also necessary. The present point is not this general one about the need for careful handling of the empirical data, but a more particular one. Even given philosophical supplementation, empirical data about disagreement among moral experts would still warrant no meta-ethical conclusions.

The reason for this is, somewhat ironically, one of the topics normative theorists disagree about, value pluralism. Normative theorists are divided about whether values are, at base, unified or divergent. Classic hedonistic utilitarians offer just happiness as intrinsically good, whereas contemporary pluralistic consequentialists hold that there are many things good in themselves. The same issue shows up in deontology. Immanuel Kant bases our duties on reason, whereas W.D. Ross argued that we have at least six kinds of duty which are equally fundamental. ${ }^{17}$ This is a point of disagreement, in principle, between ethical objectivists. For example, classic utilitarians hold that happiness is objectively intrinsically good, whereas pluralistic consequentialists hold that there are multiple things that are objectively irreducibly intrinsically good.

More recently, psychologists have collected evidence for pluralism about values. Richard Shweder and colleagues have developed a tripartite conception of the moral domain. ${ }^{18}$ The values most familiar to western philosophers fall into the class of[^5]values Shweder and colleagues give the name "autonomy." This domain, "relies on regulative concepts such as harm, rights, and justice... and aims to protect the discretionary choice of 'individuals' and to promote the exercise of individual will in the pursuit of personal preferences." ${ }^{19}$ However, on the basis of an analysis of moral discourse of residents of Bhubaneswar, India, Shweder and colleagues add two more classes of values. First there is the class called "divinity," which "relies on regulative concepts such as sacred order, natural order, tradition, sanctity, sin, and pollution." 20 The other class of values is "community," which "relies on regulative concepts such as duty, hierarchy, interdependency, and souls.... It aims to protect the moral integrity of the various stations or roles that constitute a 'society' or 'community', where a 'society' or 'community' is conceived of as a corporate entity with an identity, standing, history, and reputation of its own." ${ }^{11}$ Although different values are emphasized in different cultures, there is reason to think that people everywhere tend to be sensitive to these three sorts of values and that they are not necessarily reducible to just one of these classes. For present purposes, we need not take a stance on whether such pluralism about values is correct. All that is necessary is that we recognize that it is a live issue, for which there is plenty of evidence from both philosophy and psychology. Value pluralism has an epistemic implication. If values are fundamentally plural, then in ordinary conditions clear understanding of one value need not imply clear understanding of others. For a pluralistic form of consequentialism in which happiness and virtue are both valued intrinsically, somebody who understands the value of happiness need not have any insight into the nature or value of virtue. The same can be said for the items on Ross's list of prima facie duties.

Here is the implication for attempts to make an empirical contribution to the metaethical argument from disagreement: if pluralism about values is correct, then in less than ideal epistemic conditions an expert about one sort of value need not be an expert about, or even especially sensitive to, other values. By extension, this opens up the possibility of there being moral experts with radically different domains of expertise. For example, let us consider, following Shweder and colleagues, hypothetical experts in community and autonomy values respectively. The experts would be actual moral experts, but it would be reasonable to expect thorough disagreement about both particular judgments and systematic explanations between them. Since actual epistemic conditions are never ideal, this is exactly the sort of moral expert about which empirical data can be collected. Under these conditions,[^6]moral disagreement among experts by itself is meta-ethically indeterminate. It could be indicative of anti-realism about values; equally, it could be indicative of fundamental, objective value pluralism. Only if value pluralism is incorrect or psychologically inefficacious can we infer any support for ethical anti-realism from disagreement among moral experts.

How might we assess whether value pluralism is correct? While empirical data might be relevant to this task, this seems not to be an empirical issue. Instead, this is a job for normative theory with systematic theorizing about the nature of value, including relations between apparently different values. The lesson for making an empirical contribution to the argument from disagreement is clear. Empirical data must be combined with explicit normative theorizing to yield determinate support for specific meta-ethical positions.

Normative ethics is doubly relevant to attempts to make an empirical contribution to the meta-ethical argument from disagreement. First, the relevant data to this issue are about experts in normative ethics. Second, this data must be combined with explicit normative theorizing about value pluralism in order to have specific meta-ethical implications. Since the relevant data have neither been collected nor combined with the appropriate kind of normative theorizing, no empirical contribution has yet been made to this argument. Despite recent appearances, there is so far no empirical information about moral disagreement that even tentatively supports ethical anti-realism. 22[^7]


[^0]:    ${ }^{1}$ John Doris and Alexandra Plakias, "How to Argue about Disagreement: Evaluative Diversity and Moral Realism," in Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, ed., Moral Psychology, Volume 2: The Cognitive Science of Morality: Intuition and Diversity (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT University Press, 2008), p. 311.

    ${ }^{2}$ Richard Boyd, "How to be a Moral Realist," in Geoffrey Sayre-McCord, ed., Essays in Moral Realism (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1988), p. 185 and cited by Doris and Plakias, op. cit., p. 311.

    ${ }^{3}$ See Gilbert Harman, The Nature of Morality (New York: Oxford University Press, 1977); see also John Mackie, Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong (New York: Penguin Books, 1977), Boyd op. cit., and Michael Smith, The Moral Problem (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1994).

    ${ }^{4}$ See Doris and Plakias, op. cit. See also Alexandra Plakias and John Doris, "How to find a Disagreement: Philosophical Diversity and Moral Realism," in Sinnott- Armstrong, ed., op. cit.

[^1]:    ${ }^{5}$ See Richard Brandt, Hopi Ethics: A Theoretical Analysis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1954); see also Richard Nisbett and Dov Cohen, Culture of Honor: The Psychology of Violence in the South (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1996).

    ${ }^{6}$ See Doris \& Plakias, op. cit.; Plakias \& Doris, op.cit.; see also Brian Leiter, "Against Convergent Moral Realism: The Respective Roles of Philosophical Argument and Empirical Evidence," in SinnottArmstrong, ed., op. cit.

    ${ }^{7}$ See Boyd, op. cit., p. 213; see also Smith, op. cit., pp. 156-157, and Michael Smith, Ethics and the A Priori (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 20-21.

    ${ }^{8}$ See Plakias \& Doris, op. cit., p. 352.

[^2]:    ${ }^{9}$ See Douglas Medin \& Scott Atran, eds., Folk Biology (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT University Press, 1998); see also Dennis Proffitt, "Naïve Physics," in Robert Wilson and Frank Keil, eds., The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT University Press, 1999).

[^3]:    ${ }^{10}$ See Jonathan Haidt, "The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to Moral Judgment," Psychological Review, Vol. 108, No. 4 (2001); see also Jonathan Haidt, Fredrik Bjorklund, and Scott Murphy, "Moral Dumbfounding: When Intuition Finds No Reason" (unpub. ms., University of Virginia, 2004), Marc Hauser, Moral Minds (New York: Harper Collins, 2006), Andrew Sneddon, "A Social Model of Moral Dumbfounding: Implications for Studying Moral Reasoning and Moral Judgment," Philosophical Psychology, Vol. 20, No. 6 (Dec. 2007).

    ${ }^{11}$ See Doris and Plakias, op. cit., pp. 313-316.

    ${ }^{12}$ See ibid., pp. 316-322.

[^4]:    ${ }^{13}$ See ibid., pp. 319-322.

    ${ }^{14}$ Ibid.

    ${ }^{15}$ See ibid., pp. 321.

[^5]:    ${ }^{17}$ See Immanuel Kant, Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. James W. Ellington (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1993); see also W.D. Ross, The Right and the Good (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1930).

    ${ }^{18}$ See Richard Shweder, Nancy Much, Manamohan Mahapatra, and Lawrence Park, "The 'Big Three' of Morality (Autonomy, Community, Divinity) and the 'Big Three' Explanations of Suffering," in Allan

[^6]:    Footnote 18 continued

    Brandt and Paul Rozin, eds., Morality and Health (New York: Routledge, 1997); see also Jonathan Haidt, Silvia Helena Koller, and Maria G. Dias, "Affect, Culture, and Morality, or Is It Wrong to Eat Your Dog?" Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 65, No. 4 (1993), Paul Rozin, Laura Lowery, Sumio Imadam and Jonathan Haidt, "The CAD Triad Hypothesis: A Mapping Between Three Moral Emotions (Contempt, Anger, Disgust) and Three Moral Codes (Community, Autonomy, Divinity)," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 76 (1999).

    ${ }^{19}$ Shweder et al., op. cit., p. 138.

    ${ }^{20}$ Ibid.

    ${ }^{21}$ Ibid; see also Jonathan Haidt and Fredrik Bjorklund, "Social Intuitionists Answer Six Questions about Moral Psychology," in Sinnott-Armstrong, ed., op. cit.

[^7]:    22 I would like to thank an anonymous referee and Thomas Magnell, the editor-in-chief of the Journal of Value Inquiry, for their attentive reading and helpful comments.

