# Commercial Medicine and the Ethics of the Profit Motive 

ADRIAN J. WALSH<br>Philosophy Discipline, School of Social Science, University of New England, Armidale,<br>NSW 2358, Australia; e-mail: awalsh@une.edu.au

## 1. Introduction: Are Commercial Motives and Medicine Mutually Exclusive?

In "Collapsing Goods in Medicine and the Value of Innovation," Thomas Magnell usefully outlines four different ways in which we might deal with the problem of medical goods whose value diminishes or even disappears when used by large numbers of the population. Magnell suggests that such collapsing goods might be dealt with either by moral suasion, regulation, a pricing mechanism, or innovation. ${ }^{1}$ While the first three options involve solving the problem, the fourth involves dissolving it since it eliminates the need for rationing medical goods that are in danger of collapsing. Since this is so, Magnell suggests that we should endeavor to pursue the option of innovation wherever possible.

Magnell makes the further claim that there are reasons for favoring a free market in medicine, insofar as the pricing mechanism typically tends to foster innovation. However, in political theory there is a long tradition of treating the commercialization of medical practices and medical resources with great suspicion, if not outright hostility. We need only think of recent debates over the permissibility of commercial surrogacy or alternatively of the sale of human body parts to note the heated discussion that commercial medicine sometimes generates. One source of such antipathy is the profit motive itself. In this paper we shall consider various moral objections to the profit motive in medicine and to what extent such hostility is justified. It will be argued that there are genuine grounds for concern; however, explaining what the grounds are requires a more nuanced account of the structure of the profit motive, as a motive, and its role in our decision-making than critics usually provide. We shall begin by considering some general objections to be found in the Western philosophical tradition to the profit motive in itself.

## 2. General Moral Objections to the Profit Motive Per Se

What lies behind the suspicion of the profit motive in medicine? The Western intellectual tradition has a long history of such suspicion. In part this derives from the Judeo-Christian heritage that tells us that we cannot simultaneously serve God and Mammon, and in no lesser part from the writings of philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle for whom a commercial orientation was a sign of moral deficiency. In The Laws, for example, Plato rails against inn-keepers whose concern with profit leads them to take advantage of their customers, and Aristotle argued that selling an object produced explicitly for exchange was unnatural and therefore morally corrupt. ${ }^{2}$ Indeed the philosophical literature is replete with examples of such hostility toward the profit motive. In what follows, some of the central themes of the philosophical repudiation of the profit motive in itself are teased out. In doing so, the aim is to provide a taxonomy of the central ways in which philosophers have attacked the profit motive in general. While no attempt is made to defend any of the objections directly, it is assumed that taken collectively they do provide a presumption that the profit motive is in some ways morally problematic.

The first objection to the profit motive that we meet in the philosophical literature involves what we might call the distraction thesis. The thought here is that money distracts us from the pursuit of more noble and elevated goals. Thus instead of engaging in more lofty activities, we are bedazzled by the lure of so-called filthy lucre. This is a theme that often appears in artistic circles, as it is often said that true artists pursue their art and ignore the temptations towards financial reward. William Blake, for instance, thought of the profit motive and the vocation of the artist as being mutually exclusive. We cannot serve Mammon and art, or so it would seem, for money distracts us from genuine art. ${ }^{3}$ We also find related themes in other areas where the activity is understood as a vocation, medicine being one of the more obvious examples.

A closely related, objection is that immersion in commercial life makes an end of a means. Money is, and can only ever be, a means to other valuable things. It is not an end in itself. Indeed, according to Aristotle, it is the embodiment of an instrumental good and, as such, cannot be a proper end of activity. However, there is something about the nature of the pursuit of profit that leads us mistakenly to view profit as an end in itself. In The Metaphysics of Morals, Kant makes a related claim when he remarks that the problem with miserly avarice is that our end is the possession of money as opposed to the enjoyment that money might bring. ${ }^{4}$ As such, it involves abject and servile enthrallment to money that,
in the eye of reason, is but a means to commodities, which in turn are but mere means.

This naturally leads to concern with a notion the ancient Greeks called pleonexia, the Romans cupiditas and we often label avarice or greed. While the previous two objections involve fundamental failures of practical reasoning, in which agents are confused about the proper ends of activity, here we have a concern with moral psychology proper, and one that has long been a staple of religious and literary discussions of money. ${ }^{5}$ The ancient Greeks had an explanation for such greed or avarice that they located within the very nature of the pursuit of money itself. It was argued by many, most famously by Aristotle, that the pursuit of money is an activity without a telos. Unlike many other goal-oriented activities, such as the successful building of a sea-worthy boat, it has no satisfaction conditions and endlessly iterates. ${ }^{6}$ Such iteration is generally seen as psychologically undesirable. ${ }^{7}$ A similar point is made by the contemporary English philosopher David Wiggins in "Truth Invention and the Meaning of Life," when he discusses the actions of a Southern hog farmer who buys more land to grow more corn to feed more pigs to buy more land and so on. ${ }^{8}$ Wiggins is concerned here with the restlessness of such a Farmer and the ultimate pointlessness of his pursuits. Here Wiggins and Aristotle are diametrically opposed to the Hobbesian tradition in which it is claimed that human beings have a natural acquisitiveness and that they desire power for the sake of power, a desire they take with them to the grave.

Writers in the Aristotelian tradition had a further reason for objecting to such iteration, namely that proper activities have a realizable goal and do not endlessly iterate. ${ }^{9}$ A real activity for Aristotle is one in which there is a possibility of satisfactory completion. ${ }^{10}$ The thought finds its echo in the claim of the nineteenth century economist, Friedrich Von Wieser, who claimed that no sound need is insatiable. ${ }^{11}$ Presumably both Aristotle and Von Wieser mean here that with unsound desires we are never satiated, even at the point of consumption, since if we take a longer-term perspective then many important needs, such as, for example, the need for water, are also insatiable. Some writers have made the even bleaker suggestion that such iteration leads to addiction. If pursuing wealth is an endless activity, then we can easily become addicted to a momentary satiation that ultimately is never satisfied. Plato's discussions of tyrannical men in the Republic and the Gorgias are good examples of such concern with money's effects on our moral psychology. ${ }^{12}$

A further concern with the profit motive isolated from the psychological states which gives rise to the phenomenon is the temptations it provides for so-called sharp practices, lying and deceit. The profit motive
is condemned on the grounds of what is taken to be the seemingly irresistible temptation it provides to employ fraudulent means. ${ }^{13}$ In The Laws, much of Plato's discussion on the perils of money deals with fraud. The Patristic Fathers, too, were concerned about it, as can be seen from St Ambrose's demand that "In contracts it is ordered that the faults in the things which are sold be made known; and if the seller has not declared these the contracts are held void by action for fraud, even if the property has passed into the possession of the purchaser.," ${ }^{14}$ Clearly concern with fraud in commerce has long been of interest to philosophers and religious moralists alike. ${ }^{15}$ Many critics of the profit motive have focused on lying, which they see as an integral part of merchants' lives. In De Officiis, Cicero claims that retail traders have little to gain unless they are dishonest. ${ }^{16}$ Similarly, a late Medieval political economist, San Bernardino, is said to have disliked the haggling of the market place because it was so often associated with "lies, perjury and swearing." ${ }^{17}$ Pursuit of profit also often leads commercial agents to forms of insincerity. Let us think of fortune hunters with their feigned cupboard love, or alternatively usedcar salesmen with their insincere sales pitches and their insincere appearances of conviviality.

The proponents of another objection focus on the destruction of amity-based relations. Here the concern is that the profit motive distorts the proper motives that ex hypothesi should be based on human solidarity. The operations of the profit-motive are said to generate social conditions in which human fellowship and human solidarity is not merely undermined but is fractured. Cicero, for example, suggested that to profit by another person's loss would be to strike at the roots of human society and fellowship. He writes that "if we each of us propose to rob or injure another for our personal gain, then we are clearly going to demolish what is more emphatically nature's creation than anything else in the whole human world: namely, the link that unites every human being with every other."${ }^{" 18}$ The English social critic Thomas Carlyle also rails against the destruction of fraternal bonds by commercial society. In a remarkable passage in Past and Present he writes that life in modern society "is not a mutual helpfulness; but rather, cloaked under due laws-of-war, named 'fair competition' and so forth, it is a mutual hostility.". ${ }^{19} \mathrm{He}$ continues that we have "profoundly forgotten everywhere that Cash-payment is not the sole relation of human beings; we think, nothing doubting, that it absolves and liquidates all engagements of man. ${ }^{20}$ Carlyle's thought here, and in the works of other sympathetic writers, is that the basis of shared and common values on which human moral community depends disintegrates and, accordingly, causes people to confront each other not as fellow beings, but as members of two separate nations whose interests are
not merely discontinuous, but necessarily and essentially hostile. Indeed part of the motivation on the part of the Medieval Franciscans for their vows of poverty was the belief that money was harmful to the ideal of universal amity. 21

The final objection is perhaps the most famous: that profit is based on exploitation. On this line of reasoning, people who are motivated by profit must consciously or unconsciously exploit people from whom they seek to profit. Underpinning this is a zero-sum view of profit-taking that finds its most famous expression in the work of Karl Marx, but which has a long lineage that can be traced back through the early socialists such as Fourier, through Medieval writers, all the way to Stoics writers. ${ }^{22}$ It is held by proponents of this objection that, as a matter of necessity, if one person gains in some commercial transaction, this can only have occurred because the other party to the transaction has lost something. ${ }^{23}$ Ex hypothesi, commercial gain can only arise through some kind of loss; there can never be two beneficiaries in such exchanges. In Marx's case, the commercial transactions with which he was primarily concerned were the wage-labor contracts, where proletarians sell their labor in return for wages. Capitalists gain profits through their failure to pay workers the full worth of their labor and thus engage in exploitation. Since capitalist profit as embodied in the wage-labor contract is gained through exploitation, the pursuit of profit must be prima facie immoral. The final point can be generalized for any commercial transaction. If we hold the zero-sum view of profit, then the profit motive is always exploitative and, accordingly, always immoral since we are aiming at an outcome that can only be successfully achieved through morally pernicious means. Once again the profit motive stands condemned.

The above six objections cover the main critical lines of thought we find on the profit motive in the Western philosophical tradition. There are many critical points that we might want to take up with each of the objections, however there is a fundamental problem that they all share, at least understood as critiques of the profit motive, and it is this general problem that will be addressed here. Since the objections above apply to all manifestations of the profit motive, they would typically be thought to provide grounds for a general repudiation of the profit motive and for market relations in toto.

But there are good reasons for rejecting such abolitionist responses to commerce, especially if our aim is to make sense of the general unease in the community toward commercial medicine. It is not at all clear that the great majority of people who object to the profit motive in medicine do so because they wish to abolish market relations. If our aim is to make sense of the generalized concern about the profit motive in medicine it would be
odd to do so within such a radical abolitionist framework. Indeed it is doubtful that communism is what the public has in mind when people express concern about commercial medicine. There are good independent reasons for wishing to defend the market and the profit motive that underpins and drives it. Although the arguments are familiar, it is wellworth restating them. ${ }^{24}$ Markets function as both incentive and information systems. In the right circumstances, and, in particular, in the absence of monopoly, the incentives that markets provide for producers can encourage innovation and the production of considerable surplus. Markets are capable of generating a superfluity of goods and fostering innovation to an extent so far unachievable in any other social arrangements. Any plausible social arrangement must, for the foreseeable future, involve at least some degree of market activity. Thus, while the concerns expressed above might play a role in our final account, they would need to be placed in a non-abolitionist framework. This leaves us with a dilemma of sorts. On the one hand, there is a feeling that commercial medicine is in some sense morally objectionable, and yet, on the other hand, it would seem that the profit motive is an integral part of markets and markets are integral features of the modern world. In the next section, as part of a search for a solution to the dilemma, various objections to the profit motive that are specific to its operation in medicine will be considered.

## 3. Moral Objections to the Profit Motive in the Sphere of Medicine

One way out of our dilemma is to isolate, following the lead of Michael Walzer and Elizabeth Anderson, a specifically non-commercial medical sphere where medicine is understood as a blocked exchange. ${ }^{25}$ The idea of isolating the commercial realm from other spheres can, in recent times at least, be traced back to the work of Walzer. In Spheres of Justice he argues that although commerce has an important and legitimate place in any reasonable society it should be excluded from certain spheres of activity. He lists fourteen examples of what he calls blocked exchanges, which are goods that we should not buy and sell. Subsequently Elizabeth Anderson argued in Value in Ethics and Economics that the expressive meanings of certain goods and activities are such that they should be placed outside the reach of commercial motives. If we believe that for medical goods and services the presence of the profit motive is morally objectionable, we might well place medicine as a whole on Walzer's list of blocked exchanges.

Opposition to commercial medicine, thus, need not be understood only in abolitionist terms. Moreover, such a move fits neatly with the tenor of
much extant criticism of commercial medicine, for it is often argued that medicine is a sphere where commercial norms, and the pursuit of profit in particular, are out of place. There is said to be something special about medicine that is not true of many other areas of human endeavor such that medicine should never be subjected to the profit motive. What could be so special about medicine? One medicine-specific objection to the profit motive in medicine concerns the relationship between the profit motive and the proper ends of medical activity. Let us recall the prior discussion of the ideas of Aristotle on the proper ends of activity and in which Aristotle claimed that money could never be an appropriate goal of a legitimate human pursuit. Aristotle had all commercial activity in mind, but we might modify the claim so that its range would be far more restricted and, accordingly, argue that although commerce has its place in society, medicine is the kind of activity that should not be pursued for commercial gain. Ex hypothesi, the goals of medicine are not to pursue profit, but healing sick people and preventing future illness.

We might even be tempted toward a much stronger claim that healing sick people is the constitutive end of medicine and hence commercial medicine necessarily violates the proper ends of medicine. While addressing the issue of how medical goods should be distributed, in "The Idea of Equality" Bernard Williams makes a very closely related assertion. ${ }^{26}$ Williams argues that if we set preventative medicine to one side, the proper ground of distribution of medical care is ill health. This, he writes, is a necessary truth. However, in many societies, while ill health may work as a necessary condition for receiving medical treatment, "it does not work as a sufficient condition since treatment costs money, and not all who are ill have the money.,"27 Hence the possession of sufficient money becomes an additional necessary condition if we are to receive the required treatment, and this Williams finds morally abhorrent. Williams argues to the contrary that need is the proper ground of treatment. Clearly the suggestion that it is necessarily true that medical resources should be allocated to those in ill-health, is intimately related, if not identical, to the claim that curing the sick is the necessary aim or end of medical practice.

Whether we adopt the much stronger line or a modally weaker counterpart, the implication is clear; commercial medicine is immoral because it violates the proper goals and in Williams's case the very meaning, of medicine. We can express the objection as follows: Pursuing money should not be a goal of medicine since it is in conflict with the proper ends of medicine, which are the satisfaction of human needs. Here commercial medicine is condemned because pursuing profit is at odds
with what are thought to be the appropriate ends of medicine understood as a social institution.

If we shift our focus from the ends of the institution of medicine itself to the motivations and attitudes of people who work in the health care area, we can reformulate the objection. The individualist counterpart of our institutional concern with the proper ends of medicine would focus on the importance of altruism in medicine. Indeed some critics have argued that those engaging in medical activity should be animated solely by other-regarding considerations of human welfare. The so-called objection from altruism can be expressed in the following manner. Pursuing profit is necessarily at odds with the proper motives and attitudes of those individuals engaged in medical activities for such actions should be broadly altruistic in aim. Lurking behind this objection is a thought that the mere presence of the profit motive is not only in tension with benevolence, but it evacuates commercial medical activity of any benevolent element. This second objection is simply the individual-oriented counterpart of the previous objection from the proper ends of medicine that would have us concentrate on the proper goals of medicine as an institution. In what follows we will focus primarily on this second objection.

We can further finesse this objection, and in so doing isolate two subvariants of it; one which focuses on the motivational set of the profitseeking commercial agent, and another which focuses on the attitudes toward medical practice of such an agent. In both cases it is argued that the pursuit of profit necessarily evacuates altruistic elements that are thought to be constitutive elements of the motivations of right-thinking medical practitioners. For this reason the motivations of medical practitioners must be only altruistic since any commercial motives will evacuate any philanthropic motives.

The first sub-variant, which may be called the objection from venality, involves a thought that profit-seeking agents, being motivated by financial gain, lack the kind of other-regarding concerns that are appropriate to medicine. Where pursuing profit comes into conflict with the philanthropic goals of medicine, then commercial agents will necessarily allow their profit-seeking to trump any other-regarding considerations. Thus instead of assisting needy people, a commercial medical practitioner will only assist needy people if it is of financial benefit to her. We might formulate this as follows: Profit seeking involves a motivational structure on the part of the commercial agent that leaves no space for the otherregarding philanthropic goals that are a necessary and proper element of medical practice. Persons who are motivated by profit lack the requisite other-regarding moral concerns. No space is left for the other-regarding goals because profit seeking necessarily evacuates such philanthropic
goals. The profit motive pushes out philanthropic motives from the agent's motivational set and thus when the occasion arises that the commercial and the philanthropic are in some considerable conflict, philanthropic motives are trumped. The objection involves what we might call an avarice-only conception of the pursuit of profit.

The proponents of the second sub-variant of the objection from altruism considers the attitudes of the commercial agent towards the activity itself. It is not so much a concern that such agents will overlook the needs of others in their practice, as it is that they are motivated by the instrumental goal of making money rather than by the intrinsic value of healing sick people. ${ }^{28}$ Commercial agents thus regard medicine and, more specifically, healing sick and injured people, as a means to acquiring wealth rather than as intrinsically valuable. According to what we might call the objection from instrumentalism, it is wrong for medical practitioners to be motivated by pecuniary gain rather than the intrinsic rewards of healing. It is wrong to have such an instrumentalist attitude towards this work. The objection can be stated as pursuing profit necessarily involves an instrumental attitude towards medical activity which is an activity that should be undertaken for non-instrumental intrinsic reasons. As was the case in the so-called objection from venality, we again encounter an idea that medicine, properly practiced, and commercial motives are mutually exclusive. Once again it is claimed that medicine must be practiced altruistically only since commercial ends evacuate the possibility of pursuing medicine as it should be pursued.

Such objections capture some central cases where we have concerns about commercial medicine, since it is not difficult to point to examples that fit the model and confirm it. Let us consider firstly a case where a person refuses medical treatment based on a patient's inability to pay. Let us imagine that a doctor refuses to give relevant medical treatment to a dying patient because it is clear that he does not have the financial resources to pay for the required treatment. Here we might locate the objectionable nature of the doctor's behavior, following the so-called objection from instrumentality, in her failure to be moved by motives that we think are appropriate to medical personnel and, following the so-called objection from venality, in her failure to take important moral considerations into account. What is objectionable is the doctor's focus on financial reward rather than healing sick people.

Alternatively, let us imagine a drug company that suppresses research on cures that do not involve drugs, or alternatively provide cures based on drugs other than those that they currently retail. Here the drug company's modus operandi is in conflict with the idea that medicine should be used to satisfy human needs in some optimal manner. Hence what is
morally objectionable is that the proper goals or ends of medicine are ignored so that the company in question might maximize its profits.

It is worth considering what practical implications such objections would have, if they were to be acted upon. If this line of reasoning is correct then it would seem that individual agents cannot enter into commercial medicine in good faith. Medical practice should only be animated by entirely altruistic motives, which would rule out the involvement of any self-regarding motives. We might call this the altruism-only condition. It is a condition that follows directly from both the so-called objection from venality and the so-called objection from instrumentalism. With respect to the so-called objection from venality, medicine must be pursued only altruistically since the profit motive evacuates the philanthropic from the agent's motivational set. With respect to the so-called objection from instrumentalism, medicine must be practiced only altruistically because commercial ends evacuate the possibility of our pursuing medicine as it should be pursued. Medicine as a whole should be regarded as a blocked exchange. In most Western societies this would involve a change that, if effected, would have tremendous social and political repercussions.

However, the medicine-specific objections to the profit motive in medicine are of concern in ways analogous to our more general objections discussed earlier. While the various imaginary cases discussed thus far fit the models outlined in the so-called objections from venality and from instrumentalism above, equally it is possible to note cases where the profit motive in medicine seems entirely morally admissible. Let us take, for example, drug companies who produce antibiotics commercially for the general public. Here we have a form of medical activity directed in part at least by the profit motive, since commercial drug companies who produce drugs such as antibiotics do so primarily to make a profit. They are animated by the profit motive and their businesses are so structured as to ensure that their operations are optimally profitable. Yet the objections would deem such behavior morally unacceptable.

Let us consider a second example. Let us think about the activities and the attitudes of the traditional family doctor, at least as we might typically conceive of such a figure. For such a doctor pursuing wealth is certainly a goal. He is animated by the profit motive. But he would not do anything to make a profit; he is a satisficing agent, instead of a maximizing one. Nor is it true that he has an instrumentalist attitude towards his work, for such a doctor is also motivated by a desire to heal. Again the profit motive is not destructive of relevant philanthropic motives. If this is correct then the avarice only conception of the profit motive is mistaken.

Such counter-examples furnish us with cases where it seems either that commercial medicine is harmless or even brings about socially necessary outcomes. If this is true, then there seems to be little justification for treating medicine as a whole as a blocked exchange. Proponents of the two objections outlined above might respond that their objections should be reworked to focus on the loss of moral worth rather than moral objectionability. Thus it is not so much that the pursuit of profit is morally objectionable, but that actions which come to be pursued for financial gain lose whatever moral worth they previously possessed. But this remains too strong since, for instance, the work of the traditional family doctor retains its moral worth even though pursuing wealth is for him a goal.

## 4. The Profit Motive as a Moral Hazard in the Sphere of Medicine

We might now be tempted to drop all moral concerns about the profit motive on the grounds of their general incoherence or impracticality. However, this would be mistaken since disquiet about commercial medicine can be justified if we are more careful about how such concern is explicated. What is required is a more nuanced account of the profit motive itself. We should not treat the profit motive as if it were a singular indivisible motive nor claim that the aims of people pursuing profit are always the same and always vicious. Instead we should adopt an approach that distinguishes morally distinct ways in which profit might be pursued. As we shall see, on the approach favored here it is probably better to talk of profit motivations rather than the profit motive itself.

Let us reconsider the objection from venality. As outlined above, it was open to the counter-objection that many commercial medical practitioners maintain their altruistic goals while simultaneously pursuing commercial ends. The doctor cares for the health of his patients while also having what we can regard as commercial aims. There are two important lessons here. The activities of individual agents, commercial or otherwise, can have more than one goal. Thus an agent working in the medical sphere can have goals other than simply healing sick people. Furthermore, commercial ends need not conflict with any philanthropic goals that are thought to be constitutive of medicine properly understood. While there will be cases where pursuing certain commercial ends will be in conflict with desirable need-oriented aims, equally there will be many occasions where we can pursue a commercial medical goal and it will not conflict, and may even harmonize, with the requisite philanthropic goal. Here the case of a drug company that produces penicillin would be a case
in point. A result of this is that so-called necessity claims here seem out of place. The mere presence of a specifically commercial motive on the part of a medical agent need not necessarily evacuate it of any other-regarding concern.

At this point it would be useful to distinguish different ways in which commercial and philanthropic goals might be articulated in an agent's motivational set and, accordingly, give rise to distinct action types. ${ }^{29}$ Let us consider three distinct types of commercial activity, all of which, as a matter of logical necessity, involve the profit-seeking motive. In lucrepathic action seeking profit is the sole or dominant consideration in an agent's all-things-considered judgments. In accumulative action, while the profit motive is a primary aim of action, its pursuit is moderated either by moral goals that have weight or by moral side-constraints. In stipendiary action the profit motive is not a goal, but rather functions as a sideconstraint on action directed by other non-commercial goals. What is morally objectionable is lucrepathic action. We are genuinely concerned with cases where commercial medical agents place financial ends ahead of the morally significant needs of others. Our objection is with pure profitseeking.

What then does this tell us about the moral status of commercial medicine? What connection, if any, might there be between commercial medicine and the morally objectionable lucrepathic motivational set described above? One response might be that since there are a variety of ways in which we might pursue profit, the concerns outlined at the outset of the paper are groundless. That would be a mistaken conclusion. The reason why we are correct to worry about the profit motive's involvement in medicine is the tendency towards lucrepathology that is a part of commercial society. Without both adequate government regulation and vigilance on the part of individual agents, commercial medicine will tend to degenerate into an activity of pure-profit seeking. Our so-called objection from venality can thus be reformulated as follows: Profit seeking has a tendency to give rise to pure profit-seeking in which such pursuit is the sole or dominant consideration in one's motivational set and in which the other-regarding goals that are a necessary and proper element of medical practice are evacuated. What is objectionable about the profit motive is the tendency it generates for philanthropic goals to be evacuated from an agent's motivational set and in an area such a medicine, where such goals are central to the nature of the activity, this is unacceptable. Thus while the mere presence of the profit motive does not necessarily evacuate benevolent other-regarding goals, there is a tendency for them to be evacuated. Of course, this is an empirical claim and as such cannot be fully demonstrated here. However, there has been a
considerable amount of empirical work undertaken in psychology that seems to indicate that the advent of financial reward undermines the intrinsic motivations of people performing tasks that they once valued in themselves. ${ }^{30}$ Thus, while it remains an open question, there are nevertheless good grounds for thinking that profit-seeking has the very tendency alluded to above.

Interpreted in this modified way, the revised objection from venality circumvents the counter-examples provided in the previous section that focus on the possibility of some commercial agents being simultaneously altruistic and profit-seekers. Let us turn now to the so-called objection from instrumentalism and here again we need to move away from any claims about the necessary immorality of the profit motive and write instead of tendencies. In the example in which a medical practitioner might well pursue profit as one of her professional goals without viewing medicine as an instrument for the accumulation of wealth, the point is that the adoption of commercial motives does not mean ipso facto that the commercial agent in question regards such activity as a mere means to money. Indeed there are many cases where it is clear that a person who is undertaking an activity for financial gain also intrinsically values the activity. Teaching philosophy in a professional environment would, in many instances, be a case in point. There are clearly cases of this in the medical profession. That nurses, for example, do what they do for money need not impinge upon their commitment and belief in the intrinsic value of what they do.

The claim about the potential compatibility of the pursuit of profit and intrinsic valuation is one example of a more general point about the relationship between instrumental and intrinsic valuation most famously made by Kant in The Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. Kant's respect for persons formulation of the categorical imperative commands us never to treat persons as mere means but always as ends. The important point for our purposes is that it leaves open the possibility that we may treat another as a means so long as we do not treat that person as a mere means. Treating another person as an end and as a means are thus potentially compatible. What is morally objectionable is treating a person as a mere means and not at the same time as an end.

However, it would be wrong to conclude that there is no connection between the profit motive and merely instrumental modes of regard. Although there is no necessity for commercial medical agents to regard the intrinsically valuable activity of medicine as a mere means to profit, and indeed there are many extant examples of medical professionals who do not do so, it does not follow that the profit motive is thereby morally neutral. There is always the danger that people who undertake
intrinsically valuable activities for financial rewards will eventually see such activities as mere means to the acquisition of wealth. Empirical psychologists call this the crowding out effect and by which they mean the crowding out of intrinsic motivations by other considerations. ${ }^{31}$ Again, this is a tendency that means that the pursuit of profit is not morally neutral. We might reformulate our so-called objection from instrumentalism as follows: The pursuit of profit in medicine has a tendency for such pursuit to lead commercial agents to regard medical practice as purely a means to the acquisition of wealth. This formulation of the objection avoids the counter-examples discussed earlier because there is no suggestion that the profit motive will always generate forms of instrumental regard. It is compatible with the fact that some forms of commercial medicine will involve non-instrumental modes of regard on the part of the medical practitioner involved.

One result of revising our objections in these ways is that commercial medicine, and more specifically the profit motive that is part and parcel of commercial medicine, instead of being a necessarily immoral institution can now be said to provide us with what we might call a moral hazard. The term "moral hazard," as used here, refers to temptations for morally vicious behavior that, given our natural proclivities, certain processes, institutional frameworks or states of affairs might present to us. ${ }^{32}$ Here, the moral hazard involves our attitudes or modes of regard towards the intrinsically-valuable activity of medicine.

The practical implications of this conclusion are significant. Being a moral hazard does not provide a warrant for treating medicine in general as a blocked exchange. But equally, we should not think of this as a justification for laissez-faire. Instead of conceiving of medicine as a blocked exchange, an alternative response is to think of it in terms of what Margaret Jane Radin calls incomplete commodification. ${ }^{33}$ Incomplete commodification involves conceding that medicine can legitimately be commercialized, and yet maintaining that certain constraints should be placed on the ways that such commercialization proceeds and the kinds of commercial activities that are morally permissible. Thus legislation should be put in place, if it is not already in place, to restrain and constrain the possibilities of lucrepathic behavior. Furthermore, medical professionals should be warned of the dangers of regarding medicine as an instrumental activity and such warnings should be built into professional directives, most notably codes of ethics. While it is permissible to regard the production of cars as a mere means, as long as certain otherregarding moral considerations are observed, this is not the case in medicine.

In making the claim about the profit motive as a moral hazard we should note two important points. This does not mean that the notion of blocked exchange is redundant. The preceding arguments about the legitimacy of circumscribed commodification do not preclude blocked exchange in particular medical goods. While commercial medicine in general looks morally permissible, there are many medical goods and services that we might well wish to leave outside the range of the market. Sales in human organs might be a case in point. Further, the focus on the profit motive as a moral hazard in medicine obviously leaves open the possibility that the profit motive will provide moral hazards in many other areas of social life.

## 5. Conclusion

The conclusion of our investigation into the ethics of the profit motive is that its presence in commercial medicine provides genuine grounds for concern because of two tendencies to which commercial agents, qua commercial agents, are prone. There is the tendency for such agents, in cases where significant other-regarding moral considerations clash with economic considerations, to disregard the moral in favor of the economic. There is also the tendency for commercial agents to regard medical practices as a mere means to the acquisition of wealth. As such, the profit motive is morally hazardous in the medical context for it furnishes commercial agents with temptations for socially-significant vicious behavior to which many of us are prone. The outcomes that ensue from such temptations are at odds with both the general aims of medicine and the proper aims of medical practitioners. The consequences of these claims for medicine are complicated. If the profit motive were to be impugned as entirely morally repugnant, either generally or in the sphere of medicine, then it would follow that medical goods and services should be treated as blocked exchanges. But the conclusion here is far less radical. The profit motive is characterized as providing non-trivial moral hazards and, as such, this provides grounds for both government regulation of, and individual vigilance when engaged in, commercial medicine. In addition there might well be exchanges in some particular goods we wish to block, for reasons other than the hazards associated with the profit motive. In rejecting the idea of medicine as a whole as a blocked exchange, this does not rule out the possibility of particular medical goods and services being placed outside the range of markets.

What implication do these conclusions have for market innovation that might alleviate the problems associated with collapsing goods? While
disquiet about the profit motive is warranted, as long as people pursuing innovation within a commercial environment do not allow their activity to degenerate into the realm of pure-profit seeking, then it is not only legitimate but also worthy of praise. Moral philosophy clearly has a place here for in explicitly articulating how commercial medicine might be corrupting, it has a role to play in helping to avoid any excesses of markets in what is an essential area of human endeavor. ${ }^{34}$

## Notes

1. See Thomas Magnell, "Collapsing Goods in Medicine and the Value of Innovation," Journal of Value Inquiry, Vol. 40, Nos. 2-3 (2006).
2. See Plato, The Laws, trans. Trevor J. Saunders (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1970), pp.457-458. Aristotle, Politics, trans. Ernest Barker (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1946), bk. I, 1256a and b, and see Scott Meikle, "Aristotle on Money," in John Smithin, ed., What Is Money? (London: Routledge, 2000).
3. See Robert Hughes, "Art and Money," in Nothing if Not Critical: Selected Essays on Art and Artists (London: Collins Harvill, 1990), pp.387-388.
4. Immanuel Kant, The Metaphysics of Morals trans. Mary Mcgregor (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1996), pp.184-186. See John Laird, The Idea of Value (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1929), p.295.
5. See Ecclesiastes $(5: 10)$.
6. See John W. Baldwin, The Medieval Theories of the Just Price: Romanists, Canonists and Theologians of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries (Philadelphia: The American Philosophical Society, 1959), p.13.
7. Plato, Gorgias in Plato: The Collected Dialogues, Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns, eds., (Princeton, N.J.: Bollingen Series, 1961), pp.275-276.

8 See David Wiggins, "Truth, Invention and the Meaning of Life," in Needs, Values Truth: Essays in the Philosophy of Value 3rd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998).

9. See Raymond De Roover, San Bernardino of Siena and Sant'antonino of Florence: The Two Great Economic Thinkers of the Middle Ages, (Boston, Mass.: Baker Library, 1967), p. 14 .
10. See Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, trans. David Ross, rev. J.L. Akrill and J.O. Urmson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980).
11. See John Laird, op. cit., p. 28.
12. See Plato, op. cit. [373e].
13. Baldwin, op. cit., p. 14 .
14. See Hugo Grotius, The Law of War and Peace (New York : Bobbs-Merrill, 1962) p. 347 .
15. See James W. Child, "Can Libertarianism Sustain a Fraud Standard?", Ethics 104 (July 1994).
16. Cicero, Cicero on Moral Obligations, trans. John Higginbotham (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1967), p. 92.
17. De Roover, op. cit., p. 14.
18. Cicero, "On Duties" III, Cicero, Selected Works, (Harmondsworth, England: Penguin,1974), pp.166-167.
19. Thomas Carlyle, "The Gospel of Mammonism," in Past and Present (London: Chapman and Hall, 1843), p. 126
20. Ibid.
21. Janet Coleman, "Property and Poverty" in J.H. Burns, ed., The Cambridge History of Medieval Political Thought (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1988), p. 631.
22. Cicero, op. cit., p. 167 .
23. See James W. Child, "Profit: The Concept and Its Moral Features," Social Philosophy and Policy 15 (1998).
24. See David Miller, "Why Markets?", in Julian Le Grand and Saul Eslin, eds., Market Socialism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989).
25. Michael Walzer, Spheres of Justice (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1983), pp.95-128 and Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993).
26. See Bernard Williams, "The Idea of Equality," Problems of the Self (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1973).
27. Ibid., p. 240 .
28. See John O'Neill, "The Varieties of Intrinsic Value," The Monist 75 (1992).
29. See Antony Flew, "The Profit Motive," Ethics 86 (1976), pp.312-322.
30. See Mark R. Lepper and David Greene, eds., The Hidden Costs of Reward: New Perspective on the Psychology of Human Motivations (Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1978).
31. Bruno Frey, Not Just for the Money: An Economic Theory of Personal Motivation (Cheltenham, England: Elgar Publishing, 1997).
32. See "Moral Hazards," in John Eatwell, Murray Milgate and Peter Newman, eds., The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (London: Macmillan, 1987).
33. See Margaret Jane Radin, Contested Commodities (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996), pp.102-104.
34. I thank James Taylor for his comments on an earlier draft of this paper. I am also indebted to audiences at the Centre for Applied Philosophy and Public Ethics at the University of Melbourne and the Philosophy Discipline, the University of New England for their discussion of the issues contained here.
