# Benchmarks for a History of Liturgical Formation 

PATRICK PRÉTOT, OSB*

A s I begin, I would like to extend my warmest thanks to the council and those who organized the Québec Congress for having invited me to speak today. I was particularly touched by this invitation because, as you know, I had to stand aside, much to my regret, from the organization of this Congress. So I would like to express before you all my grateful affection towards Lizette Larson-Miller, for this gesture of fellowship, and above all for having accepted to take over from me as president. Our president elect Martin Stuflesser and all the members of the council are of course included in this heartfelt thank-you. To be perfectly truthful, I should mention that I hesitated before accepting this invitation to speak here in Québec, because the underlying reasons for my well-founded decision not to come to Würzburg remain. At the same time, I had to re-orient my future academic obligations. And so it is with modesty and gratitude that I stand here before you this morning. I am as aware of the extent of the honour that you bestow on me as of my limits as to the task at hand.

## INTRODUCTION

This presentation is obviously not going to attempt a synthesis of the history of liturgical formation. The subject is not a totally unexplored area, but as far as my research into the question has been able to enlighten me, it remains a subject that[^0]has been not much studied for itself ${ }^{1}$, even by liturgical historians ${ }^{2}$. When the question has indeed been taken up, it has been principally approached from the point of view of contemporary problematics, and in the context of reflection upon liturgical theology and pastoral practice ${ }^{3}$.

We should also take note that in standard French studies of the history of education ${ }^{4}$, for example Henri-Irénée Marrou's L'histoire de l'éducation dans l'Antiquités or Pierre Richés (Marrou's disciple and successor at the Sorbonne) classic works, Éducation et culture dans l'Occident barbare and Ecoles et enseignement dans le[^1]

Haut Moyen Age $e^{6}$, the question of "liturgical formation" is not dealt with as such. It does make an appearance in these authors studies of Christian Initiation ${ }^{7}$, but the question of how laity and clergy were formed to liturgical life is not raised. This relative silence is no doubt the result of separation between different fields of academic study; although historians of liturgy and historians of education are not unaware of each other's existence, the dynamics of their respective studies have never led them to construct a common object for their research.

Although the subject of liturgical history does not appear in the tables of contents of historical publications, the question itself is far from absent. For example, Pierre Riché, in a passage on "Elementary and Specialised Teaching", points out that in early medieval programmes of study, "reading and chant were complementary subjects. Students memorized through song not only psalms, but also the short Latin texts they were to study". ${ }^{8}$ Then he adds this important remark:

All children, even if they do not have good voices, were to learn to sing. When Charlemagne made cantus part of his programme's obligatory core content, his object was both general formation and liturgical studies. The children were to start participating in liturgical services, and to learn to sing on the basis of psalms, hymns and canticles. ${ }^{?}$

So it is already clear that, from the point of view of history, at least in the earlier periods, liturgical formation is probably "hiding itself" in "general formation," and runs the risk of remaining invisible as much to historians as to liturgists. We may even make the hypothesis that, over time, liturgical formation will become all the more visible and necessary in so far as "general formation" loses its living link to the liturgy. This first element can orient further research; at a time when processes of transmission are breaking down, it would be helpful to dig deeper into this fundamental aspect, in particular on the basis of documents like hagiographical sources and canonical collection ${ }^{10}$, with a view to coming to a better understanding of the way the major benchmarks of liturgical experience were handed on in the[^2]past, within Christian living.

Having set this background, I shall now seek to shed light on the relationship played out through history between, on one hand, liturgy in its celebration, and on the other, what we can place under the approximate heading of "liturgical formation". I have just used the adjective "approximate" because it is clear to me that the notion of "liturgical formation" hides a multitude of realities. It is to be hoped that the different approaches that will become apparent during our Congress will help us to delineate the subject with greater clarity, a subject whose foundational character was underlined by the Liturgical Movement, and whose essential importance for teachers of liturgy is now evident. The risk we run is that of a certain confusion if we do not distinguish the varied realities lurking behind this notion.

At the least, a historical survey can help us to realize just how complex the idea of "liturgical formation" is, by calling into question oversimplifications which present it as a homogenous reality over the course of time. The very diversity of the expressions used to designate it though history is a sign of a constant plurality of practices as well as of understandings. Today, under the influence of the Liturgical Movement, we usually speak of "liturgical formation" or "formation for liturgy", and while the term "mystagogy" has recently reappeared, in the Early Modern period liturgists seem to have favoured the expressions "explanations" and "instructions"."

In order to set the character of liturgical formation into its historical context, or rather contexts, I shall divide my account into historical stages, with a view to identifying the various actors, places and moments that play a role in the process, as well as to working out as much as possible of its aims and methods. This approach is not without risk. There will be no difficulty to find exceptions that do not fit into the suggested outline. Moreover, in order fully to take into account the complexity of the historical reality, it would be necessary to extend the investigation well beyond what is possible here. However, in the absence of a more precise survey, this approach may at least allow us to reach a general idea of the question.

To begin, a few methodological reflections seem necessary.[^3]

## 1. ON THE NOTION OF "LITURGICAL FORMATION"

We should begin by taking note that the notion of "liturgical formation", meaning the transmission of an intellectual knowledge concerning liturgy, is no doubt a recent idea, born in the Liturgical Movement, where it became one of its most vital aspects $^{12}$. It is not going too far to say that this concern for formation was at the origin of the development between 1841 and 1962 of an educative project that today seems almost inconceivable. Furthermore, this project reached the whole of the Christian people, and was embodied in numerous publications, articles, sessions, congresses, and above all in the publishing of missals like those of Dom Gaspar Lefebvre (1880-1966), a Benedictine of the monastery of Saint-André-lez-Bruges ${ }^{13}$.

This provisional definition of "liturgical formation" as "the transmission of an intellectual knowledge concerning liturgy" matches what comes to mind naturally when we hear the expression. Of course liturgical formation goes well beyond this approximate and provisional definition; hence two further important remarks are called for.

In the first place, just as the pairs "worship" - "liturgy" in English, "Liturgie" "Kult" in German, and "liturgie" - "culte" in French are not perfectly equivalent, the term "formation" probably does not point to the same mental representations in our different languages and cultures. This is partly because of differing traditions as to the manner of teaching. But it is also rooted in the very nature of the matter at hand. What is at issue here is not only a "knowledge about" (savoir sur) liturgy, but also "knowing how to be" (savoir-être), a "knowing how to do" (savoir-faire), and even an important element of "knowing how to live" (savoir-vivre). So we can[^4]already see that the notion of formation masks a highly complex reality. ${ }^{14}$ It is thus probable that the relative silence on this subject that I pointed out earlier results from the difficulty it presents.

In the second place, this is true not only in space, but also over time. While it is certainly true that the Liturgical Movement had a decisive impact on the idea of formation, it is important to counterbalance this by pointing out that a concern for liturgical formation is by no means limited to the contemporary period. What is true of liturgical inculturation is also true of liturgical formation; the Church has always been confronted with the necessity of transmitting its practices, even though the ways of so doing have differed over the course of time. ${ }^{15}$ This preoccupation existed long before the Liturgical Movement, but no doubt in a different manner, and, above all, without the use of the word "formation".

The importance of this preoccupation is striking; the learned publications on the liturgy published in France throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries ${ }^{16}$ favour the word "instruction" and employ an explanatory paradigm. It is no secret that Early Modernity bears the mark of the forces unleashed by Luther and the other reformers, and of their desire that the disciples of Christ not be abandoned to ignorance. This desire was echoed within the Roman Catholic Church in the educational institutions developed after the Council of Trent; here in Québec we can cite the work of Early Modern religious orders like the Society of Jesus and the Ursulines. Liturgical historiography over the past century has perhaps overly neglected this Early Modern period because of the justifiable attraction for the primitive and patristic periods. But the Early Modern period has much to teach us about the prehistory of that concern for formation that was so important for the Liturgical Movement. ${ }^{17}$[^5]

## 2. A HISTORICAL SETTING TO PERMIT A GENERAL OVERVIEW

As I said in my introduction, what follows is an overview divided into historical periods with a view to identifying the principal stages of the history of liturgical formation. ${ }^{18}$ But as Father Pierre-Marie Gy often pointed out, although division into historical periods can be helpful, such divisions are always somewhat artificial and so partly false. The divisions created never quite match the slow evolution of practices and representations that characterize liturgical life. ${ }^{19}$ However, and despite these necessary precautions, we shall adopt a division into four or five main periods. The first period runs until the emergence of the earliest liturgical institutions; hence it ends towards the middle of the fourth century. The second period is the "high" patristic era. The third stage is the Middle Ages. It is important here to bear in mind that the Middle Ages is anything but a homogenous block, and with regard to formation, the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries are worlds away from the ninth century; the emergence of universities in the thirteenth century constitutes a sort of turning point. ${ }^{20}$

Finally, the Early Modern / Modern period brings with it a new situation. The Liturgical Movement was in part the product of this situation, and at the same time the result of a sustained effort to move on, as can be seen in certain of Dom Guéranger's writings. So it would be possible to speak of a fifth period inaugurated by the Liturgical Movement, because of the ways it transformed participation in the liturgy ${ }^{21}$ as well as its methods of scientific investigation that would serve as a basis for formation. Liturgical formation is durably marked by the development of historical studies of liturgy following on from Msgr Duchesne. ${ }^{22}$ Indeed over several decades liturgical formation was more or less identified with a knowledge[^6]of liturgical history. ${ }^{23}$

Within the setting of a paper delivered to this Congress, without going into detail, I shall limit myself to calling attention to the essential structures of formation, by identifying its principal actors, the context of the act of formation, and the contents that were transmitted.

I am indebted for my hypothesis to an article on "practical and spiritual theology" by René Marlé S.J., in which he suggests understanding the diversification of theology over time as a process of progressive distinction and even separation between Scripture, theology, liturgy and spirituality. ${ }^{24}$ In this evocative synthesis written for a theology textbook, Marlé notes that in the patristic age, as well as during part of the Middle Ages (the example of St. Anselm comes to mind), the form of theological discourse was "above all, if not exclusively, a scriptural commentary." He adds that in this situation, "theology was directly spiritual, indeed it was also pastoral, and developed spontaneously into prayer or exhortation." But he goes on to point out that since the later Middle Ages theology has taken:

... the form of an often highly rarefied and subtle critique of the language of faith and of the possibilities of discourse concerning God, and ... in parallel, a growing number of works and pamphlets, seeking, in varying registers, to account for the experience of faith. ${ }^{25}$

In other terms, since the Middle Ages, the splitting of theological reflection into Scripture, theology and liturgy has isolated liturgy as a ritual practice generally[^7]safeguarded by a body of rules destined to ensure its correct execution. ${ }^{26}$ This splitting can be said to have "given sanctuary" to liturgy by cutting it off from ethical responsibility and even, all too often, from the seeking of God. My intention is now to consider our different historical periods from the point of view of liturgical formation in the light of this hypothesis.

## 3. THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH

After the first generations follows the period of the apostolic Fathers, a time that can be described as "pre-Constantinian", covering the second and third centuries. I shall group these two periods together, although an attentive reading of our past president Gordon Lathrop's recent book, The Four Gospels on Sunday, would invite us to distinguish these two periods ${ }^{27}$; the years during which the biblical canon was slowly worked out obeyed a dynamic that escapes us for the most part, but which also certainly left an essential mark on the formation of believers.

During these early periods, Christian institutions were still in gestation; their embryonic forms were tributary to their regional contexts, and above all handed on orally. Only a tiny quantity of evidence remains, which raises the permanent risk of reading too much into it. We can of course cite important documents like the Didachè, ${ }^{28}$ the letters of Ignatius of Antioch, ${ }^{29}$ Tertullian's work on baptism, ${ }^{30}$ or even, and especially, the Apostolic Tradition. ${ }^{31}$ Nonetheless, it is now widely[^8]recognized how quickly any attempt to suggest general reconstructions runs up against inevitable historiographical difficulties. ${ }^{32}$ However, it is probably true that in this early period, the inheritance of Jewish institutions played a significant role, so that the study of the Jewish origins of Christian worship may be illuminating. But it is also clear that recent historiography on this subject lacks sufficient consensus to draw firm conclusions. ${ }^{33}$

During this first period, the first actors were without doubt the apostles, but also, after them, and before the hierarchical structure: bishop/presbyterium and deacons, emerged, didascales carried the new faith's message. So it was the Gospel, that is to say the proclamation of the Good News, in particular through the Gospel stories, but also Paul's letters, that constituted the first means of liturgical formation. As Gordon Lathrop stressed in his opening address at the Würzburg Congress, ${ }^{34}$ these were concerned not so much with saying something about liturgy as with reforming assemblies so that they might live as authentic disciples of Jesus. Of course, while the New Testament and the earliest Christian writings were never textbooks for liturgical formation, we may still rapidly take note of two[^9]examples: the first Letter of Paul to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 11:17-34) and Justin's First Apology. 35

When the apostle Paul wrote to believers in Corinth, we know that he undertook a stern critique of their assemblies. He began by pointing out that these assemblies "did more harm than good" (11:17), he did not hesitate to denounce the divisions of the community (11:18-19), going as far as to discredit meetings that were not what they were supposed to be; for he said that "when you all come together, it is no longer the Lord's supper that you take" (11:20).

At a later date, this passage would be too often interpreted in the light of verse 27 : "the one who will have eaten the bread or drunk the cup of the Lord unworthily will have to answer for the body and blood of the Lord", focalizing discernment on the conscience of the individual who receives communion, an insistence which has often kept believers away from participation in the eucharistic table. ${ }^{36}$ In reality, Paul is recalling a received $\operatorname{tradition}^{37}(11: 23 \mathrm{~b}-25)$ as an invitation to the Corinthians not to pervert what is given in order to be lived in the Lord's supper, that is to say, "whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the death of the Lord until he comes".

This is certainly an act of formation, one whose object is the authenticity of practices. It is not something "about" the eucharist, but rather it seeks to foster Christian life; and the eucharist is the criterion of the truth of Christian life. So we have here a clear indication of how inseparable liturgical formation and ethical formation are at this point in history. It is unsettling to realize that over history, respect for traditions or for ritual regulations has at times coexisted with the sort of deviations of meaning that Paul did not hesitate to denounce. ${ }^{38}$ For the Corinthians were no doubt acting in accord with what they themselves thought they had received, and indeed Paul does not ask them to modify the ritual order of their action. The history of the Church can doubtless provide us with numerous examples of what we could call perversions of liturgy. It bears repeating that the perversion is not in the first place deviation from the ritual observance but a subversion of the action inasmuch as it realises the saving work carried out by Christ's Passover.[^10]

For Justin, liturgical formation seems to be closely linked to a vision of the Church as a "priestly people".39 This is why the essential setting of formation is the Sunday assembly, not so much as the coming together of those who have followed the Way as the manifestation of the priestly community of believers. For in the assembly that meets on the Lord's Day resound the "memoirs of the apostles" and "the writings of the prophets", and "the one who presides" "lifts up to heaven prayers and thanksgivings", and are shared not only "consecrated foods", but other goods in aid of "all who are in need".40

Hence it is clear that in this earliest period liturgical formation is undertaken by those who announce the Gospel, and its content can be identified with that Tradition which Paul says he has received from the Lord himself. This formation takes place especially within the Sunday assembly and so is addressed to the whole of the Christian people.

## 4. THE "HIGH" PATRISTIC PERIOD

Of course, more than the preceding period, the age that has often been presented as the golden age of the liturgy as well as that of the formation of the Christian people for the liturgy, is the first that comes to mind when liturgical formation is mentioned. However, as Robert Taft reminds us, liturgists must beware of making the patristic era (fourth to sixth centuries) a "golden age", even if it certainly is a fascinating time for our subject. ${ }^{41}$ The fourth century, that saw the major institutions of the Christian liturgy take form, in particular the catechumenate and the development of the liturgical year, can be seen as expressing a primordial concern for Christian formation; the catecheses that accompanied the process of Christian initiation show that this concern for Christian formation is inseparable from liturgical formation. Directly concerning our subject, the patristic sacramental catecheses have even sometimes appeared to be a sort of normative[^11]model for liturgical formation ${ }^{42}$. The proximity of catechesis and liturgy during this period can indeed lead us to wonder whether ancient catechesis was not primarily liturgical formation, that is to say formation "by" and "in", or "within", liturgy. ${ }^{43}$

The complexity of this period invites us to guard against an idealisation of the fruits that may have been borne by the mystagogical teaching of the likes of Cyril of Jerusalem, John Chrysostom or Theodore of Mopsuestia in the East ${ }^{44}$, or the baptismal catecheses of Ambrose of Milan and Augustine of Hippo. ${ }^{45}$ Nonetheless, these outstanding texts remain sources of inspiration for the liturgical formation of believers. We can take note of the fact that in France the classic distinction between pre-baptismal and post-baptismal catechesis, along with the idea and practice of mystagogy (at least in part) ${ }^{46}$ have been recovered as a result of a

42 Cf. Jean Daniélou, Bible et liturgie, La théologie biblique des sacrements et des fêtes d'après les Pères de l'Église, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. « Lex orandi » 11, 1951 ; ID., La Catéchèse aux premiers siècles, Cours du Rév. Père Jean Daniélou rédigé par Régine Du Charlat, Paris, Fayard, Mame, 1968 ; cf. Guillaume Derville, Histoire, mystère, sacrement. L'initiation chrétienne dans loeuvre de Jean Daniélou, Paris, DDB-Artège, coll. «Sed Contra», 2014 ; Michel Dujarier, Le parrainage des adultes aux trois premiers siècles de l'Eglise. Recherche historique sur l'évolution des garanties et des étapes catéchuménales avant 313, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Parole et mission » 4, 1962 ; ID., Brève histoire du catéchuménat, Abidjan, I.C.A.O., 1980 ; ID., « Lévolution de la pastorale catéchuménale aux six premiers siècles de l'Église », LMD 71, 1962, 46-61.

${ }_{43}$ Cf. Paul L. Gavrilyuk, Histoire du catéchuménat dans l'Église ancienne, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. « Initiations aux Pères de l'Église», 2007; François Cassingena-Trévédy, Les Pères de l'Église et la liturgie, Paris, DDB, coll. « Théologie à l'Université », 2009.

${ }_{44}$ Cyrille De Jérusalem, Catéchèses mystagogiques, trad. Auguste Piédagnel, Pierre Paris, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources chrétiennes» 126 bis, le éd., 1965, 4e éd., 2009 ; Théodore De Mopsueste, trad. R. Tonneau, R. Devreesse, Vatican, «Studi e Testi» 145, 1949 ; Jean Chrysostome, Huit Catéchèses baptismales inédites, éd. Antoine Wenger, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources chrétiennes» 50bis, 2e éd. revue, 1970 ; ID., Trois Catéchèses Baptismales, éd. tr., Auguste Piédagnel, avec la collaboration de Louis Doutreleau, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes » 366, 1990.

45 Ambroise De Milan, Des sacrements. Des mystères. Explication du Symbole, éd. Bernard Botte, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes», 25 bis, le éd. 1961, 2e éd., 1980, réimpr. 1994 ; cf. en parallèle Saint Augustin, Sermons pour la Pâque, trad. S. Poque, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources chrétiennes» 116, 2e éd., 2003.

${ }^{46}$ Cf. notamment Connaissance des Pères de l'Église, nํ126, 2012/2 «La Mystagogie d'hier à aujourd'hui, Actes du colloque de 2012 », avec notamment les contributions de Marie-Anne Vannier, «La place et le sens de la mystagogie chez les Pères et l’enjeu actuel»; Pierre Maraval, «Les Catéchèses mystagogiques de Cyrille de Jérusalem» ; Louis-Marie Chauvet, « La mystagogie aujourd’hui. Chances et limites»; Mgr Michel Pansard, «Lactualité de la mystagogie»; Luc Mellet, «Richesses et promesses de la mystagogie pour la catéchèse à tous les âges de la vie»; Mgr Claude Dagens, «Pourquoi et comment revaloriser la mystagogie dans la mission de l'Église ?».
general effort of catechetical renewal. ${ }^{47}$ But here again, the emphasis placed on certain types of sources runs the risk of making us forget that liturgical formation during this period also took many other routes, in particular the type of preaching exemplified by Leo the Great ${ }^{48}$ or Gregory the Great ${ }^{49}$, what we call today liturgical catechesis. But even though these documents must be accorded an utmost importance, many others should be taken into account, and perhaps first among them the hagiographical narratives that were beginning to come into circulation ${ }^{50}$, through which the example of the saints transmitted a "knowing how to be" (savoir-être) of Christian practices, including ritual practices.

We need to listen to Augustine here, for there are good reasons for holding him as the master of Christian pedagogy. ${ }^{51}$ For example, in his discussion of the formation of catechumens, the author of De Catechizandis rudibus points out:

Concerning the sacrament they are to receive, it is enough for the more gifted to be told the meaning of the rites, but with the less intelligent it is necessary to provide further explanations and comparisons, so that they do not treat what[^12]they see lightly. ${ }^{52}$

Furthermore, we should remember that in the well-known passage concerning Christian signs in book III of De Doctrina christiana, Augustine underlines Christian liberty in this matter; he emphasises that in the economy of the New Covenant, the multitude of signs that were in effect at the time "of the patriarchs, the prophets, and all the figures of the history of Israel" has been replaced by "a small number" "that the Lord himself and the teaching of the apostles has handed on to us" (he is making reference to "baptism and the sacrament of the Body and Blood of the Lord") and which he says are "very easy to accomplish, very august in their meaning, and very holy in their observance". ${ }^{53}$ Indeed, for Augustine, "all Christians, when they receive them, know, after being instructed, what they refer to, and are thereby led to revere them, not out of fleshly servitude, but, on the contrary, with spiritual freedom". ${ }^{44}$

Augustinian liturgical formation thus appears in all its pertinence; at a time when the tendency to confuse the mechanical application of rules with a true ars celebrandi reappears here and there, the vision of the great bishop of Hippo is more important than ever:

Now, - says Augustine - as to follow the letter and to take the signs for the realities they symbolise comes from weakness and bondage, so to misinterpret the signs comes from being misled by error. ${ }^{55}$

It is clear that the patristic period was an important time for liturgical formation. In continuity with the preceding period, the liturgical assembly is still the veritable site of formation; the importance placed on due order in assemblies and episcopal complaints about the absenteeism that is beginning to make itself felt testify to this. The subject matter is too vast to develop here; however, we can sum up what can be learned from this early period in two points.

First, as with mystagogical catecheses, it was not so much a matter of liturgical formation as we understand it today as formation for Christian living. This formation made use of Scripture as its primary source in order to hand on the fundamental elements of the faith rooted in liturgical experience.[^13]

Second, this "formation" was given in the setting of the Christian assembly, normally by bishops, or by priests or deacons in their name; there was thus an essential link between liturgical formation and the service of the community. Liturgical formation was not anyone's specialty, but was part of the duties of all pastors.

## 5. MEDIEVAL LIGHT AND SHADOWS

I had originally planned to spend more time on this particular period, because as I prepared this lecture, my preliminary research led me to enriching discoveries concerning the Middle Ages. ${ }^{56}$ As well, among historians, medievalists have paid more attention than most to the question of the transmission of knowledge. ${ }^{57}$ But also because it is particularly during this period that the concern with liturgical formation begins to appear and find expression everywhere.

In conformity with this lecture's general hypothesis, that of a splitting up of Scripture, theology and spirituality beginning in the Middle Ages, the period can be described as that of the veritable birth of formation "for" liturgy. Whereas during the patristic period theology, and hence liturgical formation, took place principally in the setting of the Christian assembly, and was thus an essentially pastoral act, the gradual appearance of a specialised body of theologians would little by little lead theological reflection to leave its initial community setting, and to become the prerogative first of the masters of the monastic cloisters, then of the masters of the university quadrangles.

Medieval writings on liturgy constitute an immensely rich body of works that took form progressively from the De officiis of Isidore of Seville at the beginning of the seventh century ${ }^{58}$ until the Rationale of Durandus of Mende (towards 1230-[^14]

1296) at the end of the thirteenth. ${ }^{59}$ We cannot do more here than evoke its scale, without even being able to cite its principal elements. ${ }^{60}$ These liturgical summae, a term we can use without fear of exaggeration, so clear is the intention of an encyclopaedic presentation, are the counterparts of the theological summae of the scholastic age. Formation for liturgy here takes the form of the transmission of a rarefied knowledge of the rites and their meaning, a transmission which was destined for clerics whose main activity had become the celebration of religious offices, and which was carried out through luxuriant allegorical commentaries, whose hermeneutic criteria today escape us, and which can sometimes take the appearance of a veritable intellectual game. The example of Durandus of Mende's commentary on bells ${ }^{61}$ will suffice to show just how rarefied medieval liturgists could become:

The wood from which the bell is hung signifies the wood of the Lord's cross, and this is why bells are sometimes hung from the highest part of the tower, because the cross had been announced by the earliest Fathers. The supports that attach or nail together the parts of this wood are the oracles of the prophets. And the[^15]iron joint that unites the bell to the wood means charity, by which the preacher glories in being indissolubly nailed to the cross when he says, "Far be it from me to think of glorying in anything else but the cross of Our Lord [Ga 6,14]."62

The writings of Pseudo-Dionysius probably had an important effect on the way this era envisaged liturgical formation. In particular, the influence of the "hierarchical doctor", as he was sometimes known in the Middle Ages, may have facilitated a vision in which the liturgy itself, and so liturgical formation, was seen as reserved to clerics. ${ }^{63}$

Moreover, the ninth century liturgist and bishop of Metz Amalarius, who died around $850^{64}$, is generally held to be at the origin of the numerous allegorical commentaries of the liturgy that would carry on all the way to the nineteenth century ${ }^{65}$ Liturgical formation can be said at that point to have been transformed into a rarefied understanding of the rites that re-interpreted the patristic tradition, whilst drawing its symbolic understanding from Scripture, a symbolism that we find baffling, since our own understanding of Scripture is moulded by modern exegesis. ${ }^{66}$

62 Guillaume Durand, Rational ou Manuel des divins Offices, Livre I, ch. IV, VII, trad. C. Barthélémy, t. I, p. 68, texte latin : CCL 140, p. 54.

${ }_{63}$ Cf. Alexandre Faivre, «Excursus», dans Naissance d'une hiérarchie : les premières étapes du cursus clérical, Paris, Beauchesne, coll. «Théologie historique», 40, 1977, p. 172 sv. ; pour le lien avec l'organisation de lespace liturgique, cf. Dominique Iogna-Prat, La Maison Dieu. Une histoire monumentale de l'Église au Moyen Âge (v. 800-v. 1200), Paris, Seuil, 2006.

64 Amalaire De Metz, De ecclesiasticis officiis libri IV (appelé aussi Liber officialis): cf. Amalarii episcopi opera liturgica omnia, ed. J. M. Hanssens, 3 vol., Cité du Vatican, «Studi e testi», 138140, 1948-1950 ; l'Université de Fribourg (Suisse) a mis en ligne un important manuscrit de cette oeuvre fondamentale (St. Gallen, Stiftsbibliothek, Cod. Sang. 278) une copie sans ornement, écrite probablement au monastère de Saint-Gall : http://www.ecodices. unifr.ch/fr/csg/0278/10 (consulté le 30 juin 2015).

${ }_{65}$ Cf. Dom Prosper Guéranger, Institutions liturgiques, t. II, ch. XVIII, Paris, Société générale de libraire catholique, Bruxelles, Victor Palmé, 1878. Dom Guéranger défend le «mysticisme» médiéval, contre les liturgistes français des XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles, chez qui il croît pouvoir reconnaitre la tendance à une sécularisation de la liturgie et au naturalisme : «il était facile de prévoir que le même mouvement, qui avait produit le renversement de la tradition dans les Missels et Bréviaires de Paris, de Cluny, de Troyes, qui avait failli corrompre le Canon de la messe dans le Missel de Meaux, qui poussait à la traduction de la Bible et des livres liturgiques en langue vulgaire, qui portait un grand nombre de prêtres à violer le secret des mystères dans la célébration de la messe, tendrait, dans cette universelle sécularisation de la Liturgie, à matérialiser les cérémonies dont l'antique mysticisme se trouvait en contradiction trop flagrante avec tout cet ensemble de naturalisme» (pp. 183-184).

66 Cf. Amalaire De Metz, De ecclesiasticis officiis III, 19, 14 : «Après avoir reçu l’offrande, le prêtre retourne à lautel, et lui ou le diacre, y dispose devant le Seigneur les offrandes destinées à lui être immolées dans la suite de la messe. De même, le Christ, après avoir reçu les voeux de la foule qui chantait, entra à Jérusalem et dans le temple du Seigneur où se trouvait l'autel, et là il se présenta, à lui et à son Dieu et Père, pour sa prochaine immolation».

Although this allegorical method draws analogies from the Bible, more or less in the way the poet Baudelaire sees correspondences between "scents, colours and sounds", ${ }^{67}$ Scripture is no longer its true referent. And so liturgical knowledge becomes autonomous. As it moved from scriptural to ritual commentary in a dynamic of increasing systemization, the allegorical approach came to be cut off from the other interpretive forms used by the Fathers, and in the first place from the literal sense, that is to say the rites' raison dêtre and their connection to the liturgical action ${ }^{68}$ Furthermore, because allegory was held to give the "spiritual" or "mystical" meaning, foundations had been laid down that would later lead to the separation between liturgy and spirituality. ${ }^{69}$ Allegory separated the liturgical action from its interpretation, while spirituality came to find its sources outside liturgical life.

All this could be taken as a pitiless critique of the medieval contribution to liturgical formation; however, such one-sidedness calls for two remarks that not only correct the imbalance, but also open two important new perspectives for research on our theme.

The first comes from an unpublished doctoral dissertation in which Martin Morard sheds light on the importance of the Psalter as a formative tool during the Middle Ages. $^{70}$ Through his evocation of a "quasi obsessive" interest in the Psalter, and by the use he makes of the expression "psalmic culture" coined by Pierre Riché, Morard seeks to identify how the psalms influenced practices, in particular those that are related to formation: learning how to read and memorisation, as well as the theological and liturgical formation of the clergy. The elements of this research[^16]that interest us the most are found in its highlighting of the specific status of the recitation of the Psalter, which according to Morard:

... acted as a sacred technique at the service of psalmody executed with a vicarious intention, at the service of the common good, as a realisation of the Davidic prophecy that theologians considered to be "the" prophecy par excellence, "almost as clear as the Gospel". ${ }^{11}$

However, Morard points out that this broke down in the twelfth century; with the arrival of dialectical reasoning, textual analysis took precedence over such practical ends, and became an element of scientific knowledge. This development provoked a double rupture: among clergy, a dissociation between lectio and oratio, and among laity, between the Psalter and devotional exercises. ${ }^{72}$

This first corrective suggests to us liturgists the need to rethink the place of the Psalter in contemporary liturgical formation. While exegetical studies of the psalms abound, ${ }^{73}$ and although studies of their liturgical exegesis do exist ${ }^{74}$, it seems to me that we lack studies showing how the psalms build up Christian liturgy, and how psalmody can still form today all those who play their part in the Opus Dei. ${ }^{75}$

The second corrective concerns the Dominican Jacques de Voragine, who died as archbishop of Genoa in 1298, and whose great work known as the Legenda Aurea is all too often reduced to a collection of legendary hagiographical tales, only good for teaching us about the medieval imagination and for furnishing interpretative keys for a number of iconographical programmes.

The reality could hardly be more different, for as Jacques Le Goff recently pointed out in his preface to the text's recent edition in the prestigious series "La Pléiade"”, the Golden Legend is "one of the most important and most characteristic texts[^17]of the Middle Ages".77 The influence of this important medieval text was long and considerable, and it brims with information that can be used in liturgical formation. It could suffice to take the example of what the table of contents reveals as to the importance of the notices about the different liturgical seasons in the whole of the work. ${ }^{78}$ But the index shows that the very notices concerning the saints contain much more about the liturgy, a technique that probably was all the more effective as it articulated a liturgical content to the hagiographical narratives that impressed themselves into people's memories.

Thus, in his notice on St. Ambrose, Jacques de Voragine remarks: "He was so strict in his ascetic practice that he fasted every day except Saturdays, Sundays, and principal feast days. ${ }^{79}$ And he attributes a major role in the establishment of liturgical institutions to St. Jerome:

In former times, people sang what they wanted in church; when the Emperor Theodosius asked Pope Damasus to call upon a scholar to organise the ecclesiastical offices... Jerome distributed the Psalter day by day, assigned its own nocturn to each day, and he prescribed that at the end of each psalm the "Glory be to the Father" should be said... Then he made a rational distribution of the epistles and gospels over the course of the year, as well as whatever concerns the chants of the office. ${ }^{80}$

Obviously, this sort of information concerning the history of worship does not meet our standards of historicity; but we can still hold that among all other medieval works, liturgical summae included, the Golden Legend had a decisive influence upon liturgical formation, simply because its way of handing on information in narrative form unified "knowing" (savoir), "knowing how to do" (savoir-faire), and above all, "knowing how to be" (savoir-être).

## 6. FORMATION FOR LITURGY UNDER A MODERN SUN

If I have emphasised the first three periods in this historical overview of liturgical formation, it seems possible to limit its last stage to a few brief remarks. Of course my main reason is to limit the length of my lecture; and many of the awaited[^18]contributions to the Congress will certainly shed light on the riches of this period, which bears the mark of a wide diversification. It was not possible for me to give its rightful place to an ecumenical perspective that would have taken account of the numerous developments of our different Christian communities.

But there also lies an affirmation and a diagnosis concerning our own day. Even though we often speak of "postmodernity" or even of "ultramodernity", it seems to me that the question of liturgical formation still bears the mark of modernity. Modernity's starting point was the separation between Scripture, theology and spirituality, a separation inherited from the Middle Ages and on which I have founded the hypothesis developed in this lecture, and as it moved on from this starting point, modernity has had its effects. We are still living within this dynamic, even if more recent developments have modified the direction taken since the Renaissance. 82

I have already underscored the importance of the Liturgical Movement as the laboratory of the idea of liturgical formation, while recalling the need to contextualise its work in the wider setting of modernity. But Early Modern developments, that is evolutions that took place between the late fifteenth and the seventeenth century brought about major shifts.

With the invention of printing, liturgical formation passed for the most part from an oral to a written form, and took place more and more through an individual study of books, whereas the medieval summae were still handed on collectively through being taught by masters. It also came to be directed to an ever broader public, including laity, and took the form of instruction situated outside the liturgical action and giving great importance to historical elements. The title of the main work of the Cluniac Benedictine Claude de Vert, a work that gave rise to much controversy, can be taken as a sort of programme for the period: Explication simple, littérale et historique des cérémonies de l'Église. ${ }^{83}$ It is no longer a matter of interpreting liturgy by means of allegory in order to enter into a comprehension of the action, but rather of "explaining" in order to know and understand. ${ }^{84}$[^19]

At a time when Roman Catholics "attended" Mass, liturgical formation became an "explanation of ceremonies". Historical erudition, which sometimes rejected the mystical interpretations of the Middle Ages, came to dominate the field. Little by little, a desire of understanding rites and texts took root and transformed in turn the way the act of formation was perceived. Henceforth, the royal road was one of translation of texts and historical explanation of rites. From this point of view there is a direct continuity between the first Liturgical Movement and modernity.

In another respect, the centralisation of liturgical authority in the Roman Catholic world which was a consequence of the decisions of the Council of Trent and the establishment of the Roman Congregation of Rites, would accentuate the disciplinary aspect of the relationship with the liturgy; and so we speak of an era of rubrics. Liturgical formation was deeply influenced by this narrowing of the field of vision whose indelible mark is still perceptible today. ${ }^{85}$

Nonetheless we should not forget other aspects which corrected the rigidity of these approaches; the "explicative" paradigm and the insistence on discipline that characterise the period are counterbalanced by an aesthetic search that finds significant expressions in baroque architecture and in the period's religious music. ${ }^{86}$ Thus the effort expended on formation aims at the adherence not only of reason but also of the heart, hence the centrality of art, liturgical singing, as well as preaching. ${ }^{87}$

At the same time, the implications of a spirituality that stressed a personal search for interiority was detrimental to the communal experience of participation in an action. This is why the twentieth century Liturgical Movement sought to counterbalance these tendencies by re-enforcing the communal dynamic of the celebration, and so placed formation for liturgy at the heart if its preoccupations.

But this model of formation aimed to undergird a somewhat militant project, that of obtaining participation in the action that was "active", "pious", and even "conscious". So participation came to have a reciprocal relationship with formation; it became the means and the setting of liturgical formation, while formation[^20]became the prior condition for the progress and the authenticity of participation. The model thus obtained is no doubt more an ideal than a reality, according to which the liturgical celebration would become, or become anew if we take the early Church into account, the essential setting for liturgical formation. It is a model of formation for liturgy through its celebration.

## CONCLUSION

This panorama remains incomplete, and its multiple gaps still need to be filled in; nonetheless, it should now be possible to come to a conclusion.

We began with a hypothesis: we can read historical developments in the light of a diagnosis, that of a gradual separation beginning with the Middle Ages between Scripture, theology and spirituality. By breaking leitourgia away from the fundamental relationship it maintained in the Church's first centuries with martyria and diakonia, this separation often reduced Christian worship to a ritual performance. In consequence, liturgical formation came to be conceived as the transmission of knowledge on the subject liturgy.

Furthermore, even though at first this knowledge continued to be inseparable from a spiritual wisdom concerning the action, thanks to the allegorical method developed in the ninth century by Amalarius of Metz, and because this method was founded on an interpretation of the rites which still drew its figures from Scripture understood through analogy, later on, in particular after the birth of early modernity, this knowledge became more and more technical, with the object of correct execution of the rites by those whose task it was to perform them.

As a result of the Liturgical Movement, and above all thanks to a series of historical studies, the liturgy gradually recovered its place not only as a science, but also as a form of ecclesial life. The leaders of the Liturgical Movement have passed on to us the legacy of the concern for formation which gave a decisive impetus to liturgical studies in universities and other formation institutes in the Church.

However the enthusiasm aroused by the rediscovery of the documents and the practices of the past led them to underestimate the phenomenon of cultural distancing that was already taking place. So today, despite the admirable depth and the richness of this heritage, it has become clear to many of us today that it has become inaccessible, at least in part, to a large number of our contemporaries.

We all know how varied, indeed opposed, the reactions to this sort of diagnosis can be. But we can at least draw two concluding thoughts from it.

First, the dream of a type of liturgical formation that would be able to find its principal support within the celebration itself is today confronted with many difficulties. The sort of historical panorama that we have just undertaken should
make us to realize that liturgical formation needs to find new routes for our postor ultra-modern era.

However, these new ways must seek to draw together Scripture, theology and spirituality in such a way that formation not be subordinated to the sole end of ritual performance, and above all that it be clearly understood to be summit and source of Christian life. ${ }^{88}$

Second, experts in pedagogy underline how much the digital world, that has only really invaded our daily life since twenty years ago, has transformed in depth not only the processes of learning and of gaining knowledge, but perhaps also even the workings of our cognitive structures and our psyche. At the dawn of modernity, the sixteenth-century reformers, Luther in particular, had an acute perception of the importance of the liturgical experience for Christian liberty (including an opposition to clerical pretensions). Today, new technologies have created a relationship between the individual and knowledge according to the mode of absolute autonomy: demand controls supply. In such a context, we should ask ourselves if our historical overview does not invite us to give priority to a conception of liturgical formation as a sort of ecclesial immersion bath, in which individuals learn to appropriate the legacy of the past while creatively reinventing it. At the least, this justifies that we at Societas Liturgica devote one of our Congresses to the subject!

Translation: Christopher Lazowski, OSB

Abbaye Saint-Wandrille[^21]


[^0]:    * Patrick Pretot has been a Benedictine monk at La-Pierre-qui-Vire-Abbey in Burgundy (France) since 1980. Since 2010, he has served as Editor of La Maison Dieu, and as ex-officio member of Service National de Pastorale Liturgique et Sacramentelle formation in France and elsewhere. His research centers on liturgical and sacramental theology.

[^1]:    1 La question semble avoir échappé aux concepteurs du manuel francophone de liturgie : cf. Aimé Georges Martimort, (dir.), L'Église en prière, nouvelle éd., 4 tomes, Paris, Desclée, 1983, 1995 ; pour la formation dans les séminaires, voir Bulletin de Saint-Sulpice, 23, 1997, «L'enseignement de la liturgie».

    2 Voir cependant de nombreuses notations dans le grand manuel germanophone de liturgie initié par Hans Bernhard Meyer, Hansjörg Auf Der Maur, Balthasar Fischer, Angelus Häussling et Bruno Kleinheyer (éd.), Gottesdienst der Kirche. Handbuch der Liturgiewissenschaft qui sera maintenant achevé par Martin Klöckener et Reinhard Messner. Pour notre propos sont d'intérêt surtout les volumes 2/2 : Theologie des Gottesdienstes: Gottesdienst im Leben der Christen. Christliche und jüdische Liturgie, rédigé par Winfried Haunerland, Karl-Heinrich Bieritz, Hans Bernhard Meyer, Philipp Gahn, Bernd Wannenwetsch, Stephan Haering, Birgit Jeggle-Merz et Gerard Rouwhorst, Ratisbonne, Friedrich Pustet Verlag, 2008, ainsi que le vol. 4 : Hans Bernhard Meyer, Eucharistie. Geschichte, Theologie, Pastoral. Avec une contribution d'Irmgard Pahl, Ratisbonne, Pustet, 1989.

    3 Cf. par ex., Pierre-Marie GY, «La formation liturgique et la participation active », LMD 77, 1964, 32-41 ; François Tollu, «La formation liturgique des futurs prêtres », LMD 78, 1964, 82-96; Ruth A. Meyers and Paul Gibson (ed.), Worship-Shaped Life: Liturgical Formation and the People of God, Canterbury Studies in Anglicanism, Harrisburg, Canterbury Press \& Morehouse Publishing, 2010 ; Andrea Grillo (ed.), La formazione liturgica, Atti della XXXIII Settimana di Studio, Camposampiero (PD) 28 agosto-2 settembre 2005, Roma, CLV-Edizioni Liturgiche, «Bibliotheca Ephemerides Liturgicae Subsidia», 137, 2006 ; Andrea Grillo, «Formazione e iniziazione simbolico-rituale alla fede. Alcune "Quaestiones disputatae" a proposito di formazione liturgica», dans Associazione Italiana Catecheti, Formazione e comunità cristiana. Un contributo al futuro itinerario, a cura di L. Meddi, Città del Vaticano, UUP, 2006, pp. 135-150; Pietro Sorci, «La formazione liturgica a 40 anni dalla Sacrosanctum concilium», Rivista Liturgica 94, 2007/2, 185-208 ; Luigi Girardi, «Dal Ritus servandus ai Praenotanda : i libri liturgici e la formazione di chi presiede », Rivista Liturgica, 94, 2007/2, 209-226 ; sous le titre «La risorsa educativa della liturgia », la Rivista Liturgica a consacré un numéro (2011/2) à divers aspects qui rejoignent la question; voir notamment Luigi Girardi, «Percorsi di formazione liturgica alla luce degli Orientamenti pastorali”, Rivista Liturgica 98, 2011/2, 271-284, texte disponible en ligne sur le site de la revue : http://www.rivistaliturgica.it/upload/2011/articolo2_271.asp (consulté le 30 juin 2015).

    4 Pour la bibliographie, et en se limitant aux ouvrages en français, on peut citer comme des classiques : E. Durkheim, Lévolution pédagogique en France, Paris, PUF, 1999, le éd. 1938 (cours prononcé en 1904-1905, qui malgré son titre, comporte des éléments généraux d'histoire de léducation ; ce document est disponible sur le site de l'Université du Québec à Chicoutimi : http://classiques.uqac. ca/classiques/Durkheim_emile/evolution_ped_france/evolution_ped_france.html, consulté le 30 juin 2015) ; G. Mialaret et J. Vial, (dir.), Histoire mondiale de léducation, Paris, PUF, 1981, 4 t.

    5 Henri-Irénée Marrou, Histoire de léducation dans l'Antiquité, 2 vol., Paris, Seuil, le éd., 1948, 6e éd. 1964 ; sur ce livre voir la relecture récente : Jean-Marie Pailler et Pascal Payen (éd.), Que reste-t-il de léducation classique? Relire «le Marrou» Histoire de léducation dans l'Antiquité, Toulouse, Presses universitaires du Mirail, coll. «Tempus», 2004.

[^2]:    6 Pierre Riché, Éducation et culture dans loccident barbare VIe-VIIIe siècles, Paris, Seuil, coll. « L'univers historique », 1re éd., 1960, 3e éd. revue et corrigée, 1972 ; Écoles et Enseignement dans le Haut Moyen Âge, Paris, Aubier « collection historique», 1979, rééd. 1989 ; pour une synthèse, cf. P. Riché, «Réflexions sur l'histoire de léducation dans le Haut Moyen Âge (Ve-XIe siècles)», Histoire de léducation, n. 50, mai 1991, texte disponible sur le site : http://ife.enslyon. fr/publications/editionelectronique/histoire-education/INRP_RH050_2.pdf (consulté le 30 juin 2015).

    7 Sur ce point, voir Henri-Irénée Marrou, Histoire de léducation dans l'Antiquité, p. 416 sv. ; Pierre Riché, Éducation et culture dans loccident barbare VIe-VIIIe siècles, p. 532 sv.

    8 Pierre Riché, Écoles et Enseignement dans le Haut Moyen Âge, p. 225.

    9 Ibid.

    10 Voir par ex. Paul Guérin, Les petits Bollandistes : vies des saints, 1876; André Artonne, Louis Guizard, Odette Pontal, Répertoire des statuts synodaux de lancienne France du XIIIe à la fin du XVIIIe siècle, Paris, CNRS, 1963.

[^3]:    11 Voir par exemple, Nicolas Le Tourneux, Instructions chrétiennes sur les sacrements et sur les cérémonies avec lesquelles l'Eglise les administre, Paris, Hélie Josset, 1686 ; Jean-Jacques Ollier, Explication des cérémonies de la grand'messe messe de paroisse selon l'usage romain, Paris, Langlois, 1687 ; et encore Louis-Albert Joly De Choin, Instructions sur le rituel, concernant la théorie et la pratique des sacrements et de la morale, et tous les principes et décisions nécessaires aux curés, confesseurs, prédicateurs, chanoines, bénéficiers, prêtres, ou simples clercs, Lyon, chez les frères Perisse Imprimeurs Libraires, 1778 (nombreuses rééditions).

[^4]:    12 La bibliographie sur ce point pourrait être immense. On se contentera de relever que cette préoccupation de formation est fondamentale chez les principaux acteurs du Mouvement liturgique : Dom Guéranger, Institutions liturgiques, Le Mans/Paris, 3 vol., 1840-1851, réeditées avec compléments, Paris, 4 vol., 1878-1885 (pensé au débat comme manuel de formation); Dom Lambert Beauduin, $L a$ piété de l'Eglise, Principes et faits, Louvain, Mont-César, 1914 ; réédité sous le titre La Piété Liturgique. Principes et faits, Louvain, Mont César, 1922 ; Romano Guardini, Vom Geist der Liturgie, Fribourg en Brisgau, Herder, «Ecclesia Orans» 1, 1918 (beaucoup de rééditions, partiellement enrichies) ; tr. fr.: L'esprit de la Liturgie, Paris, Plon, 1929, rééd. Paris, Parole et Silence, 2007; tr. amér. : The Spirit of the Liturgy, 20e éd., «Milestones In Catholic Theology », New York, The Crossroad Publishing Company, 1998 ; ID., Liturgie und liturgische Bildung, Würzburg, Werkbund-Verlag, (1923) 1966, 2e éd., Mainz, Matthias-Grünewald-Verlag; Paderborn, F. Schöningh, 1992; Collectif, Etudes de pastorale liturgique - Vanves, 26-28 janvier 1944, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, Coll. «Lex orandi» 1, 1944 ; voir aussi Vincent Petit, Église et Nation. La question liturgique en France au XIXe siècle, Rennes, Presses Universitaires de Rennes, 2010.

    ${ }^{13}$ Le Missel vespéral de Dom Lefebvre, est sans doute l'un des livres les plus connus des fidèles catholiques romains dans la première moitié du XXe siècle; il aura un immense impact pour la formation des fidèles à la liturgie : il connut un succès fulgurant et les nombreuses traductions lui assurèrent un rayonnement international ; cf. Arnaud Join-Lambert, « Du Livre d'Heures médiéval au Paroissien du XXe siècle », Revue d'Histoire ecclésiastique, 101, 2006, 618-655; dans l'espace germanophone, voir en particulier le Missel du bénédictin Anselm Schott (1e éd. 1884) et celui d'Urbanus Bomm (1e éd. 1927).

[^5]:    14 Les querelles concernant les méthodes catéchétiques qui ont marqué le paysage catholique romain français dans les dernières décennies du XXe siècle, constituent à leur manière un symptôme : il est difficile de penser un acte de formation qui touche tout lêtre, et pas seulement l'intellect. Sur le sujet, voir Joël Molinario, Joseph Colomb et l'affaire du catéchisme progressif, Paris, DDB, coll. « Théologie à l'Université », 2010 ; Isabelle Morel, Les années Pierres vivantes : retour sur un débat interrompu, Paris, DDB, coll. « Théologie à l'Université », 2015.

    15 Cf. Pierre-Marie GY, «Linculturation de la liturgie chrétienne en Occident», LMD 179, 1989, 5373 ; dans cet exposé donné au Congrès de la Societas Liturgica à York, en août 1989, le P. Gy soulignait que, non seulement le christianisme a produit une culture, mais il a toujours dû se situer face à des cultures existantes : à ce titre, il a toujours pratiqué l'inculturation.

    16 Cf. par ex. Pierre Le Brun, Explication de la messe (1726), Paris, Éd. du Cerf, «Lex orandi» 9, 1949 ; cf. Xavier Bisaro, Le passé présent. Une enquête liturgique dans la France du début du XVIIIe siècle, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, «Histoire religieuse de la France», 2012 ; Jean-Yves Hameline, «'L'explication de la messe' de Pierre Le Brun (1716-1726). Témoin d'un tournant décisif pour l'histoire du culte. A propos d'un ouvrage récent », LMD 274, 2013/2, 201-232.

    17 Cf. Denis Gagnon, «La catéchèse liturgique dans les rituels post-tridentins », LMD 177, 1989, 67-95.

[^6]:    18 J’ai pris soin de vérifier ces intuitions auprès de plusieurs collègues historiens des institutions liturgiques et je les remercie.

    19 Dans le même sens, voir la remarque de Jean-Marc Goglin, dans sa recension du livre de J. Le Goff, Les intellectuels au Moyen Age (sur site : http://clio-cr.clionautes.org/jacques-le-goff-lesintellectuels-au-moyen-age-collection-point-histoire-78-seuil-paris-2014-nouveau-tirage-231-p-760-eur.html\#.VZ9we_ntlHw, consulté le 30 juin 2015) : «L'interprétation de Jacques Le Goff est celle que les hommes de la Renaissance ont eue du Moyen Âge. Or, les césures entre l'Antiquité tardive et le Moyen Âge puis entre le Moyen Âge n'existent pas. Cette fin du moyen Âge est davantage une transition et une vision de la Renaissance comme une période de nouveautés, de renouveau mais aussi d’abandon semble plus juste».

    20 J. Verger (dir.), Histoire des universités en France, Toulouse, Privat, 1986 ; ID., Histoire des universités, Paris, PUF, coll. «Que sais-je», 2e éd., 2007.

    ${ }_{21}$ Cf. Pierre-Marie GY, «La formation liturgique et la participation active», LMD 77, 1964, 32-41.

    22 Mgr Louis Duchesne, Les origines du culte chrétien, le éd., Paris, Thorin, 1889, 5e éd., revue et augm., Paris, De Boccard, 1920 ; cf. Jean Yves Hameline, «Les 'Origines du culte chrétien’ et le Mouvement liturgique», LMD 181, 1990, 51-96.

[^7]:    ${ }^{23}$ On pourrait ici citer beaucoup d'ouvrages classiques y compris un manuel comme l'Église en prière (éd. A. G. Martimort) mais aussi quantité douvrages sur les différents aspects de la liturgie comme par exemple : Dom Suitbert Bäumer, Histoire du bréviaire, 2 vol., Paris, Éditions Letouzey et Ané, 1905 (d'abord en un seul volume en allemand : Geschichte des Breviers, Fribourg en Brisgau, Herder, 1895; réimpression avec une introduction d'Angelus A. Häussling, Bonn, Nova \& Vetera, 2004), ou surtout Josef Andreas Jungmann, Missarum Sollemnia. Eine genetische Erklärung der römischen Messe, 2 vol., . Wien Herder, le éd., 1948 ; 2e éd. 1949; 5e éd., Wien-Freiburg-Basel Herder - Bonn, Herder 1962 (réimpression: Bonn, Nova \& Vetera, 2003; tr. fr. Missarum Sollemnia, Explication génétique de la messe romaine, 3 t., Paris, Aubier, coll. « Théologie », 19-21, 1950-1954 (la traduction du t. I, publiée en 1956 a été revue et mise à jour d'après la $3 e$ éd. allemande).

    ${ }^{24}$ R. Marlé, «Théologie pratique et spirituelle» dans Bernard Lauret et François Refoulé, (éd.), Initiation à la pratique de la théologie, t. I: Introduction, 4e éd. mise à jour, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, 1994, pp. 287-297 ; R. Marlé théologien, ayant publié notamment sur R. Bultmann, a été directeur de l'Institut Supérieur de Pastorale Catéchétique, à ce titre engagé dans le renouveau catéchétique qui a suivi le Concile Vatican II.

    ${ }^{25}$ Ibid., p. 288-289.

[^8]:    26 Le Ritus servandus du Missel Romain de 1570 avait pour origine un document du Ministre Général des franciscains Haymo de Faversham (mort vert 1243) destiné à susciter l'unité des pratiques parmi les prêtres de l'Ordre. La Présentation générale du Missel Romain de 1969 (3e éd. 2000) obéit à une autre logique qui fait le lien entre des prescriptions liturgiques, souvent susceptibles « d’adaptations ", avec un enracinement théologique dans la Tradition, et sans jamais oublier la dimension pastorale de la célébration. Sur ce point : cf. Edward Foley (general editor), John F. Baldovin, Mary Collins and Joanne M. Pierce (eds.), A Commentary on the Order of Mass of the Roman Missal, Collegeville, Liturgical Press, «Pueblo Books », 2011, spécialement pp. 23-25.

    27 Gordon W. Lathrop, The Four Gospels on Sunday: The New Testament and the Reform of Christian Worship, Minneapolis, Fortress, 2012, traduction française en préparation.

    ${ }_{28}$ La Doctrine des Douze Apôtres (Didachè), éd. Willy Rordorf et André Tuilier, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes» 248bis, 1e éd., 1978, 2e éd. 1998.

    29 Ignace D’Antioche, Polycarpe De Smyrne, Lettres, Martyre de Polycarpe, éd. Pierre Thomas Camelot, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources chrétiennes», 10 bis, le éd. 1944, 4e éd. 1969, réimpr. 2007.

    ${ }_{30}$ Tertullien, Traité du Baptême, éd. François Refoulé, tr. en collab. avec Maurice Drouzy, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes », 35, le éd., 1952, éd. revue et corrigée, réimpr. 2002.

    ${ }^{31}$ Dom Bernard Botte, La Tradition apostolique de saint Hippolyte : essai de reconstitution, Münster, Aschendorff, 5e éd. actualisée par Albert Gerhards, Münster, Aschendorff, «Liturgiewissenschaftliche Quellen und Forschungen», 39, 1989; Hippolyte De Rome, La Tradition Apostolique, éd. Dom Bernard Botte, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes» 11, 1e éd., 1946 ; 2e éd., La Tradition apostolique daprès les anciennes versions, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes »11bis, 1968 ; The Apostolic Tradition: A Commentary, by Paul Bradshaw, Maxwell E. Johnson, and L. Edward Phillips, ed. by Harold W. Attridge, Minneapolis, Augsburg Fortress, «Hermeneia : A Critical \& Historical Commentary on the Bible», 2002, 2005.

[^9]:    32 Sur ces questions, voir cependant les remarques inspirantes de Paul De Clerck, à propos de louvrage cité ci-dessus (The Apostolic Tradition: A Commentary) : P. De Clerck, « note de lecture», LMD 236, 2003, 177-187.

    ${ }_{33}$ Cf. Paul Bradshaw and Lawrence A. Hoffman, The Making of Jewish and Christian Worship, University of Notre Dame Press, 1990; Paul Bradshaw, The Search for the Origins of Christian Worship: Sources and Methods for the Study of Early Liturgy, London, SPCK - New York, Oxford University Press, 1992, second revised and enlarged edition, 2002 ; trad. fr. (sur la le éd.): La liturgie chrétienne en ses origines. Sources et méthodes, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Liturgie», 1995 ; Albert Gerhards, Clemens Leonhard, (ed.), Jewish and Christian Liturgy and Worship. New Insights into its History and Interaction, Leiden, Brill NV, coll. «Jewish and Christian Perspectives Series», 2007; pour une mise en perspective des questions sur le sujet, cf. la communication de G. Rouwhorst, lors de la 60e Semaine d'Études liturgiques de l'Institut Saint Serge (24-27 juin 2013), sous le titre «L'autorité et la reconstruction de la liturgie paléo-chrétienne» (à paraître), et surtout Gerard ROUWHORST, «Christliche und jüdische Liturgie. Christlicher Gottesdienst und der Gottesdienst Israels. Forschungsgeschichte, historische Interaktionen, Theologie», Theologie des Gottesdienstes (voir note 2), p. 491- 572.

    ${ }^{34}$ Gordon W. Lathrop, «Le Nouveau Testament et la réforme du culte chrétien», LMD 277, 2014, $13-32$.

[^10]:    35 Justin, Première Apologie, dans Justin, Apologie pour les chrétiens, trad. Charles Munier, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes» 507, 2006, ch. 65, pp. 304-305 ; ch. 67, pp. 310-311.

    ${ }^{36}$ Pour la discipline dans l'Église catholique romaine, cf. PIE X, Décret Sacra Tridentina, sur la communion fréquente, 20 décembre 1905, dans Les enseignements pontificaux, La liturgie, Présentation et tables par les moines de Solesmes, s.l., Desclée \& Cie, s.d., nn. 255-273.

    37 Cf. 1 Co 11, 23a : «J'ai moi-même reçu ce qui vient du Seigneur, et je vous l'ai transmis».

    38 Sur ce thème, voir spécialement Gordon W. Lathrop, The Four Gospels on Sunday, "Preface", p. IX-X.

[^11]:    39 Cf. Gustave Martelet, Deux mille ans d'Église en question, Des Martyrs à l'Inquisition, Théologie du sacerdoce, t. II, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, 1990, qui n’hésite pas à parler à ce propos de «peuple archisacerdotal» (pp. 93-107).

    40 Justin, Première Apologie, ch. 67.

    ${ }^{41}$ Robert Taft, «L'apport des liturgies d'Orient à l'intelligence du culte chrétien», dans Paul De Clerck (éd.), La liturgie, un lieu théologique, Paris, Beauchesne, coll. «Sciences théologiques et religieuses», pp. 97-122.

[^12]:    47 Conférence des évêques de France, Texte National pour lorientation de la catéchèse en France et principes dorganisation, Paris, Bayard, Cerf, Fleurus-Mame, 2007 ; « la liturgie est le lieu où l'Église expérimente pour elle-même dans toute sa richesse la foi dans laquelle elle est établie. La liturgie est surtout le lieu vivant de l'initiation : dans le langage de la beauté, les attitudes, les déplacements, les gestes et les paroles quèlle fait vivre, elle aide à découvrir comment chaque acte et chaque parole du Christ ont été posés pour "notre salut". C’est par ce chemin d'expérience que la liturgie insère dans le mystère pascal.» (p. 43).

    ${ }_{48}$ Léon Le Grand, Sermons 1-19, t. I., éd., Jean Leclercq, René Dolle, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. « Sources Chrétiennes», 22bis, 2 e éd., 1964 ; Sermons 20 - 37, éd. René Dolle, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. « Sources Chrétiennes », 49bis, le éd., 1957, 2e éd., 1969, réimpr. 2008 ; Sermons 38-64, éd. René Dolle, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes », 74bis, le éd., 1961, 2e éd., 1976, réimpr. 2004 ; Sermons 65-98. Éloge de saint Léon, index, éd. René Dolle, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes», 200, le éd. 1973, réimpr. 2006.

    49 Grégoire Le Grand, Homélie sur l'Évangile, Livre I (1-20), t. I, éd. Raymond Étaix, Bruno Judic, Charles Morel, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes», 485, 2005 ; Homélie sur l'Évangile, Livre I, (21 - 40), t. II, éd. Georges Blanc, Raymond Étaix, Bruno Judic, Charles Morel, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes», 522, 2008.

    ${ }^{50}$ Même s'il est présenté comme ermite, le succès de la Vie d'Antoine par St Athanase a sans doute influencé non seulement la conception de la prière mais aussi celle de la vie chrétienne et de la pratique des sacrements : Athanase D'Alexandrie, Vie d'Antoine, éd. Gérard J. M. Bartelink, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes», 400, 1994, réimpr. 2004 ; de même, les récits et miracles rapportés par Grégoire le Grand dans les Dialogues : Grégoire Le Grand, Dialogues, Introduction, Bibliographie et cartes, t. I, éd. Adalbert De Vogüé, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes», 251, 1978, réimpr. 2006 ; ID., Dialogues, I-III, t. II, éd. Adalbert De Vogüé, tr. Paul Antin, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes », 260, 1979, réimpr. 2011 ; ID., Dialogues, IV, tables et index, t. III, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Sources Chrétiennes», 265, 1980, réimpr. 2013.

    51 Saint Augustin, Le Magistère Chrétien, De catechizandis rudibus, De doctrina christiana, éd. Gustave Combès et Maurice Farges, Paris, Desclée de Brouwer et Cie, «Bibliothèque augustinienne, OEuvres de Saint Augustin », 11, 1949 (d'après le texte l'édition bénédictine); La première catéchèse, De catechizandis rudibus, éd. Goulven MADEC, Paris, Études augustiniennes, «OEuvres de Saint Augustin », 11/1, 1991 (d’après le texte du Corpus Christianorum).

[^13]:    52 Saint Augustin, La première catéchèse, De catechizandis rudibus, IX, 13, p. 95.

    53 Saint Augustin, Le Magistère Chrétien, De doctrina christiana, Livre III, IX, 13, p. 357-359.

    54 Ibid.

    55 Ibid., p. 359 ; Augustin ajoute alors : «Certes celui qui, sans comprendre la signification d’un signe, comprend pourtant que c'est un signe, n'est pas sous le joug de la servitude. Il vaut mieux néanmoins être sous le joug de signes incompris mais utiles, que de dégager son cou, en les interprétant inutilement, pour l'engager dans les filets de l'erreur».

[^14]:    56 Cf. la synthèse très riche de Pierre Riché, concernant le Haut Moyen âge, et citée déjà plus haut : P. Riché, «Réflexions sur l'histoire de l'éducation dans le Haut Moyen Âge, (Ve - XIe siècles)», texte disponible sur le site : http://ife.enslyon. fr/publications/edition-electronique/histoire-education/ INRP_RH050_2.pdf (consulté le 30 juin 2015).

    57 Outre les ouvrages fondamentaux de P. Riché déjà cités, les historiens se sont surtout intéressés à l'histoire de la vie intellectuelle : cf. J. Le Goff, Les intellectuels au Moyen Age, Paris, Seuil, coll. «Point Histoire» 78, 2014, le éd., 1957 ; Alain De Libera, Penser au Moyen Âge, Paris, Seuil, le éd., 1991, 2e éd., coll. «Essais », 1996) ; Georges DUBY, Art et société au Moyen Âge, Paris, Seuil, coll. «Points Histoire», 1995, 1997 ; Jacques Paul, Histoire intellectuelle de l'Occident médiéval, Paris, Armand Colin, coll. «U : Histoire», 1973, nouvelle éd., 1998 ; ID., Culture et vie intellectuelle dans l'Occident médiéval. Textes et documents, Paris, Armand Colin, 1999, coll. « U : Histoire», 1999.

    ${ }_{58}$ Isidore De Séville, De ecclesiasticis officiis, PL 83 ; tr. en anglais : Thomas Louis Knoebel, Isidore of Seville : De Ecclesiasticis Officiis, New York, Paulist Press, «Ancient Christian Writers», 61, 2008.

[^15]:    59 Durand De Mende, Rationale divinorum officiorum, ed. Anselme Davril et Timothy M. Thibodeau, Livres I-IV, Turnhout, Brepols, «Corpus christianorum, Continuatio Mediaevalis [= CCCM], 140, 1995; Livres V-VI, ed. A. Davril et T. M. Thibodeau, CCCM 140A, 1998 : Livres VII-VIII, ed. A. Davril, T. M. Thibodeau, adiuvante B.-G. Guyot, CCCM 140B, 2000; tr. en anglais: Timothy M. Thibodeau, The Rationale Divinorum Officiorum of William Durand of Mende: A New Translation of the Prologue and Book One, New York, Columbia University Press, 2007; William Durand, Rationale. Book four, On the mass and each action pertaining to it, introd., transl. and notes by T. M. Thibodeau, Turnhout, Brepols, «Corpus christianorum in transl.» [CCT], 14, 2013; tr. fr. : Rational ou manuel des divins offices de Guillaume Durand, évêque de Mende au treizième siècle ..., tr. par Charles Barthélémy, Paris, Vivès, 1854, 4 t. ; (ouvrage disponible sur Google books); Guillaume Durand, Le sens spirituel de la liturgie, tr. par Dominique Millet-Gérard, présentation de Claude Barthe, Paris, Ad Solem, 2002 ; traduction allemande en préparation à paraître dans la collection «Liturgiewissenschaftliche Quellen und Forschungen»; sur Guillaume Durand, cf. Pierre-Marie GY, O.P. (éd.), Guillaume Durand. évêque de Mende (vers 1230-1296), canoniste, liturgiste et homme politique, Actes de la table ronde du CNRS, Paris, CNRS, 1992.

    60 Cf. notamment, Johannes Beleth, Summa de ecclesiasticis officiis, ed. Heribert Douteil, Turnhout, Brepols, «Corpus christianorum, Continuatio Mediaevalis» [= CCCM] 40-41A, 1976; Bernold De Constance, Micrologus de ecclesiasticis observationibus, PL 151, 979 sv. (appelé aussi Bernold de St Blaise, Bernold est un moine bénédictin du XIe s., v. 1050- 1100); Sicard De Crémone, Mitrale seu De officiis ecclesiasticis summa, PL 213, 13-436; Sicardi Cremonensis episcopi Mitralis de officiis, ed. Gábor Sarbak et Lorenz Weinrich, Turnhout, Brepols, CCCM 228, 2008 ; tr. en allemand par Lorenz Weinrich : Sicard Von Cremona, Mitralis, Der Gottesdienst der Kirche, Turnhout, Brepols, CCT 9, 2011 (Sicard de Crémone, v. 1155-1215, devient évêque de Crémone en 1185).

    ${ }^{61}$ Le Rationale divinorum officiorum de Durand de Mende, qui devient évêque de Mende, après avoir été à la curie romaine, mais rentre assez vite à Rome après avoir été installé à Mende, est l'un des traités les plus importants du Moyen Âge. Daté de la fin du XIIIe s., il traite des églises, de la hiérarchie cléricale, des vêtements liturgiques, de la messe, de loffice divin, des offices du dimanche, des fêtes des saints et du comput ecclésiastique. Il aura un impact important puisqu’on recense plus de deux cents manuscrits de l'époque médiévale, et que c'est l'un des premiers livres à avoir été imprimé (Mayence, 1457) après la Bible de Gutenberg.

[^16]:    67 Charles Baudelaire, «Correspondances», dans Les Fleurs du mal (1857) :

    La Nature est un temple où de vivants piliers

    Laissent parfois sortir de confuses paroles :

    L'homme y passe à travers des forêts de symboles

    Qui lobservent avec des regards familiers.

    Comme de longs échos qui de loin se confondent

    Dans une ténébreuse et profonde unité,

    Vaste comme la nuit et comme la clarté,

    Les parfums, les couleurs et les sons se répondent.

    68 Sur les méthodes d'interprétation des Écritures au Moyen Âge, cf. Henri De Lubac, Exégèse médiévale. Les quatre sens de l'Ecriture, 4 vol., Paris, Aubier, « Théologie », 1959.

    69 Sur la spiritualité médiévale, voir la synthèse d'André Vauchez, La spiritualité du moyen âge occidental, VIIIe-XIIe siècles», Paris, PUF, coll. «Sup», 1975, qui, parlant du Haut Moyen Âge, n’hésite pas à parler de «civilisation de la liturgie» (pp. 14-18) et qui montre le détachement de la liturgie au profit des dévotions qui résulte de l'émergence entre la fin du XIe s. et le début du XIIIe s. d'une « religion des temps nouveaux » (ch. III, p. 75 sv.).

    70 Martin Morard, La harpe des Clercs. Réception médiévales du Psautier latin entre usages populaires et commentaires scolaires, Thèse d'histoire médiévale soutenue à l'Université de Paris IV-Sorbonne, dir. Jacques Verger, 3 vol., 2870 p., 2008 ; cf. résumé publié dans Revue Mabillon, n. s., t. 20 (= t. 81), 2009, 309-313; la thèse repose sur un très large corpus de sources, en grande partie inédites (6100 unités codicologiques, 300 commentaires entre 1050 et 1350).

[^17]:    ${ }_{71}$ Martin Morard, «La harpe des Clercs... », Revue Mabillon, n. s., t. 20 (= t. 81), 2009, p. 312.

    72 Sur les pratiques de la prière, cf. Prier au Moyen Âge, Pratiques et Expériences $\left(\mathrm{V}^{e}-\mathrm{XV}^{e}\right.$ siècles), Textes traduits et commentés sous la direction de Nicole Bériou, Jacques Berlioz et Jean Longère, s.l., Brepols, 1991.

    ${ }_{73}$ Sur le plan exégétique, la bibliographie est immense : voir par ex. Evode Beaucamp, Le Psautier, 2 vol., Paris, Gabalda, coll. «Sources Bibliques», 1976 -1979 ; M. Mannati, É. De Solms, Les psaumes, 4 vols, Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, «Cahiers de la Pierre-qui-Vire», 26-29, 1966-1968; Paul Beauchamp, Psaumes nuit et jour, Paris, Seuil, 1980 ; Matthieu Collin, Le livre des Psaumes, Paris, Éd. du Cerf, « Cahier Evangile» 92, 1995 ; Marc Girard, Les Psaumes redécouverts. De la structure au sens, 3 vol., Montréal, Bellarmin/Paris, Éd. du Cerf, 1994 (2e éd. revue et corrigée du t. 1, 1996); Jean-Luc Vesco, Le Psautier de David traduit et commenté, 2 vol., Paris, Éd. du Cerf, coll. «Lectio divina», 210 et 211, 2006.

    ${ }_{74}$ Chanoine André Rose, Les psaumes voix du Christ et de l'Église, Paris, Éditions P. Lethielleux, coll. «Bible et vie chrétienne», 1981.

    75 Matthieu Collin, Comme un murmure de cithare. Introduction aux Psaumes, Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 2008.

    76 Jacques De Voragine, La légende dorée, publiée sous la direction d'Alain Boureau, Paris, Gallimard, «Bibliothèque de la Pléiade», 2004 ; cette édition en un volume de 1550 pages comporte de nombreuses notes et des index de grande qualité.

[^18]:    ${ }_{77}$ Jacques Le Goff, Préface, dans Jacques De Voragine, La légende dorée, p. IX.

    78 Ch. 1, L'Avent du Seigneur ; ch. 6, La Nativité du Seigneur ; ch. 31, La Septuagésime ; ch. 32, La Sexagésime; ch. 33, La Quinquagésime; ch. 34, La Quadragésime; ch. 35, Le Jeûne des quatre-temps ; ch. 50, L'Annonciation ; ch. 51, La Passion du Seigneur ; ch. 52, La Résurrection du Seigneur ; ch. 66, La Litanie majeure et la liturgie mineure; ch. 67, L'Ascension du Seigneur ; ch. 68, L'Envoi du Saint-Esprit ; ch. 115, L'Assomption de la sainte Vierge Marie ; ch. 127, La Nativité de la sainte Vierge Marie ; ch. 158, La Fête de tous les saints; ch. 159, La Commémoration de tous les fidèles; ch. 178, La Dédicace de l'Église.

    79 Jacques De Voragine, La légende dorée, p. 305.

    80 Ibid., p. 815 .

[^19]:    81 Pour une synthèse stimulante, voir David Bisson, «La spiritualité au miroir de l'ultramodernité», Amnis [En ligne], 11 | 2012, mis en ligne le 10 septembre 2012, consulté le 13 juillet 2015. URL : http:// amnis.revues.org/1728; DOI : 10.4000/amnis. 1728 .

    82 Cf. Ibid. : pour désigner les marques de l'ultramodernité, l’auteur repère quatre caractéristiques de la spiritualité ultramoderne : 1 / L'individualisation du croire ; 2 / La subjectivisation des expériences ; 3/ L'unité entre le monde humain et le monde divin ; 4/ La recherche de communalisations chaudes.

    83 Dom Claude De Vert, Explication simple, littérale et historique des cérémonies de l'Église, 4 t., Paris, 1706-1713, 3 vol., 2e éd. Paris, Florentin Delaulne, 1709-1713; la 3e édition publiée à Paris en 1720 est disponible sur Google books : https://books.google.fr/books?id=sd4CAAAAQAAJ\&hl=fr.

    ${ }^{84}$ Cf. Gilles Drouin, «Quand Bossuet explique la messe», LMD 280, 2014/4, 59-78.

[^20]:    85 Parmi bien d'autres, on peut citer ici l'un des manuels qui fut en usage dans les séminaires en France pendant presqu'un siècle : Manuel de liturgie et cérémonial selon le rit romain par les PP. Léon Le Vavasseur et Joseph Haegy,... 16e éd., revue et mise à jour par le P. Louis Stercky, 2 t., Paris, Gabalda, 1935. Une étude comparative des diverses éditions permettrait une vision diachronique qui pourrait éclairer lévolution des conceptions de la formation du clergé à la liturgie durant cette période.

    86 Cf. Jürgen Bärsch, «Une réforme liturgique à lépoque baroque ? Pour un autre regard sur la vie cultuelle aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles dans lespace germanophone », LMD 278, 2014/2, 83-106.

    87 Cf. Jean-Yves Hameline, «L'invention de la 'musique sacrée'», LMD 233, 2003/1, 103-135 ; Mathieu LOURS, L'autre temps des cathédrales, du Concile de Trente à la fin de l'Ancien Régime, Paris, Picard, 2010 ; Isabelle Brian, Prêcher à Paris sous l'Ancien Régime - XVIIe-XVIIIe siècles, Paris, Classiques Garnier, coll. Lire le XVIIe siècle», 2014.

[^21]:    88 Cf. Concile Vatican II, Constitution sur la liturgie, n. 10.

