# The Merits of Dispositional Moral Realism 

KEVIN MICHAEL DELAPP<br>Converse College, 580 East Main Street, Spartanburg, SC 29302-0006, USA;<br>e-mail: kevin.delapp@converse.edu

## 1. Introduction

One of the challenges facing modern defenses of moral realism is the difficulty of articulating a plausible moral ontology that avoids the extravagances of Platonism. Realists have unfortunately been reticent on this issue, rarely addressing the question of what it is that moral judgments are true in virtue of or what aspect of the world it is to which true moral judgments correspond. But if realists have been wary of confronting ontological issues, irrealists have been quick to supply ontological pictures on their behalf. One of the most damaging, but pervasive ontological accounts foisted upon realists has been a primary quality model of objects. For example, J. L. Mackie characterized realism as the view that moral values are somehow part of the "furniture of the world."1 Irrealists are not to blame for this distortion. Objects are a familiar and relatively easilyarticulated entity, and realists have simply not provided many explicit alternatives. However, silence here should not imply consent.

One alternative model of realist values has been offered by John McDowell. ${ }^{2}$ McDowell suggests that we understand moral values as analogous to secondary qualities, which he interprets as dispositions to bring about certain experiences and perceptions under certain conditions. McDowell's theory has been subject to many concerns and objections. If successful, though, it has the advantage of clarifying how realist values could be belief-independent while still preserving some connection to human sensibility. After revisiting McDowell's analogy, a version of the dispositional model of moral values will be defended here. One of the reasons such a theory has been resisted has been due to a misunderstanding of moral realism as a view that would have us deny any metaphysical connection between moral values and moral agents. Although moral realists are committed to the belief-independence of values, realists need to be cautious not to divorce morality too much from human nature.

Too deep of a rift between actual moral agents and free-floating disembodied values has given rise to well-known problems about moral motivation and knowledge. To address this, a distinction will be urged between moral realism and moral objectivism. Moral values can be real without being objective, and McDowell's dispositional account will be requisitioned to help articulate this possibility.

## 2. Realism Versus Objectivism

Moral realism may be defined as the view that supports the conjunction of the following three propositions. First, moral statements are truth-apt. Second, at least some moral statements are in fact true. Third, to say that a statement is true is to say that it bears a correspondence to features of the world that exist independently of the evidence or beliefs of anyone or everyone, or even of epistemically-idealized agents.

It is worth noting that this definition, perhaps controversially, excludes as genuinely realist any view which would have us interpret truth according to non-correspondence theories. Thus, for instance, sophisticated noncognitivist accounts which preserve moral truth by reference to deflationary or minimalist theories of truth are not legitimate expressions of moral realism as here defined. In addition, the definition does not preclude epistemically-idealized agents from adequately or reliably reflecting moral truth, provided that they do not constitute it: according to realism, individuals may be authorities on moral value, but not authors of it. At any rate, some version of the above definition is shared by a majority of philosophers who call themselves moral realists. ${ }^{3}$

Moreover, by saying that moral values exist independently of evidence or beliefs is not to affirm the overly strong view that moral values are independent of any human sensibility. It is consistent with realism as defined above that the expression of moral values necessarily involves referencing certain features of agents. This difference is too often conflated by realists and irrealists alike. A contrast between realism and objectivism with respect to values may help clarify this distinction.

In twentieth-century meta-ethics, "objectivity" has frequently been used synonymously with "realism."4 This association is misleading for several reasons. For one thing, objectivity is sometimes associated with the view that moral value is impersonal or otherwise lacking in what David Brink has called a "qualitative dimension." " Peter Railton calls this sense of "objectivity" the impartialist sense and contrasts it with two other closely related types of ethical objectivity, an objectual sense and a deliberative sense. ${ }^{6}$ The objectual sense is an expression of the view that
we can make informed judgments and acquire knowledge without bias or prejudice. This sense of "objectivity" is implicit when we tell people to try and be objective when making a decision. With the deliberative sense of "objectivity" we make reference to the following of valid rules and forms of reasoning. Indeed, part of the validity of the rules is supposed to consist in their being accessible to anyone who thinks rationally about them. The rules are thus objective in the sense that their acceptability will range over everyone who follows them. It seems that any of these three senses of objectivity are compatible with moral realism as understood in the above definition. However, they are not equivalent to it. Someone can think that moral values are not determined by anyone's beliefs about them without also thinking that we can or should ever be objective.

There is an additional sense of "objectivity" that should be resisted by realists. Objectivity may also be characterized by what Bernard Williams has called an "absolute conception of reality." "7 According to Williams, something admits of an absolute conception if and only if it is "nonperspectival." ${ }^{8}$ However, it is exceedingly unclear how a conception of reality could be in principle non-perspectival. There seems to be a patent absurdity in the idea of a non-perspectival conception of reality when our very act of conceiving constitutes a perspective. How can agents characterize reality by absolute conception if agents are prevented from using their concepts in the first place? As Railton points out, the idea of an absolute conception appears self-defeating for these reasons: "a standpoint without any subjectivity is a standpoint with no point of viewwhich is to say, no standpoint at all.",

Thomas Nagel's consideration of the so-called view from nowhere also helps shed light on some of the problems which face an absolute conception of reality. ${ }^{10}$ As Nagel observes, there is a tension implicit in any attempt to reconcile the feeling that a particular experience is uniquely our own with the impulse to abstract from anything peculiar to an individual perspective. Though we feel pulled in the direction of objectivity, we find it impossible to leave behind our subjectivity fully. Our subjectivity is itself a part of the very world which we seek to identify with the objective perspective. Stepping outside of our own embodied perspective is useful in trying to identify bias or prejudice; but exclusively catering our ontology to such a perspective would eliminate too much, resulting in what Nagel calls objective blindness. David Wiggins makes a similar point, arguing that one of the incoherencies of reductive views such as non-cognitivism is that they collapse what he calls the inner view we subjectively take toward our first-personal experiences into the objectifying outer view according to which we view
things third-personally. As Wiggins says, "The outside view must pay some heed to the differences that the inner view perceives.""11

In this way, we can distinguish moral realism from moral objectivism. Moral realism is the view that moral values exist independently of any evidential or cognitive contributions of agents. By contrast, moral objectivism is the view that moral values exist in a way that makes no reference to any features of agents whatsoever. It seems possible to be a realist without being an objectivist in this sense: we can believe that moral values exist independently of our beliefs about them, even if we also believe that the content of such values nonetheless makes reference to us and our capacities. Morality may be essentially about us, but it is no less real for this fact. In this way, moral value does not need to differ dramatically from other familiar entities. A desk, for instance, exists independently of anyone's beliefs about it, even though it would be impossible to meaningfully articulate the concept of being a desk without reference to certain anthropocentric interests and perspectives. We may call this objectivity if we like, as long as we are careful to distinguish it from any non-perspectival version of an absolute conception. Not only does such a view threaten to be self-defeating, but it also arbitrarily eliminates us and our concepts from reality. Our subjectivities exist and must be accounted for in any objective perspective that purports to be complete or absolute.

## 3. Dispositions and Secondary Qualities

Another reason to distinguish moral realism from moral objectivism is that moral objectivism connotes an ontology of objects, which is a mode of existence inappropriate to values even as construed by realists. For instance, it seems clear that morality is not spatiotemporally bounded: we do not say that goodness exists "over there." Although particular actions, events, and characters that instantiate moral values might be spatiotemporally bounded, the values themselves are sine loco et anno. Though moral values for a realist are entities in some sense, they are not objects. Realists are committed to less ontologically than objectivists. This is yet another reason to prefer the term "realism" to the entrenched nomenclature of "objectivism."

Despite the absurdity of envisioning moral properties as literal, spatiotemporal objects, this is the de facto characterization which has tacitly dominated many discussions of the metaphysics of moral realism. Mackie described the objectivist values which he indicted as erroneous as "structural elements" of the world. ${ }^{12}$ Furthermore, he utilized Hume's discussion of the mind's "propensity to spread itself on external objects"
as representative of what he saw as the objectivist's error. ${ }^{13}$ Commenting from the realist side, David Brink has also stated that moral realists are "usually" characterized as analogous to scientific realists about disciplines such as physics and chemistry, which in turn are taken to involve the study of "real objects." 14 The point here is not that such writers themselves envision moral properties as spatiotemporal, but that the default language of "furniture," "structural elements," "objects," and entities similar to the entities studied by physicists all have engendered an implicit association of moral realism with a primary quality ontology.

If realist moral values cannot exist as primary qualities, objects or anything spatiotemporally bounded, we could say, at this point, that moral values must therefore not really exist. However, this would be to abandon realism and instead to commit ourselves to a rarefied ontology of exclusively spatiotemporal entities. Even deniers of realism should be wary of this sort of restricted ontology. After all, we do commonly recognize the reality of entities that are not spatiotemporally bounded. Even some of the items in the ontology of physics are admitted as real without being spatiotemporally located, including subatomic particles, forces, or fields. Only a "rough desert-dweller," to use an evocative phrase of David Lewis, would conceive of an ontology strictly limited to objects. ${ }^{15}$

But if the ontology of moral value is not the ontology of an object, what is it? What ontological status can we give it that preserves the existence that realists want, but that also does not render value spatiotemporal? Realists have largely taken recourse to two different strategies at this point. On the one hand, there are realists who have embraced a sui generis understanding of moral properties. Persuaded largely by G. E. Moore's open-question argument, such realists are skeptical of accounts that involve the definition, identification, or reduction of evaluative properties to any other sort of properties, natural as well as supernatural. ${ }^{16}$ On the other hand, there are contemporary moral realists who have been more optimistic about such accounts and seek to articulate co-extensions between moral properties and certain sets of natural properties. They attempt to maintain the belief-independence of moral values by linking them with scientific, behavioral or psychological properties which are themselves belief-independent and causally-efficacious. ${ }^{17}$

Despite the attractions each strategy might have for realists, there are certain disadvantages that bear mentioning. Put simply, a sui generis construal of realism threatens to render values hyper-real, divorced radically from anything else in the realm of human experience and sensibility. Such unparsimonious realism should be accepted only as a last philosophical resort. Conversely, accounts by naturalists who maintain
that moral values are co-extensional with certain scientific, behavioral, or psychological properties threaten to render moral values not quite realist enough. For example, it is commonly argued by such realists that while moral properties may be co-extensionally reduced to non-moral properties, a comparable co-intensional reduction must be resisted. However, it is unclear why we ought to persist in the usage of sui generis moral language if the values picked out by such language are not themselves sui generis.

In any event, let us consider a third frequently neglected option that may offer more of a middle ground between the two more dominant forms of realism. The alternative has been given best expression by John McDowell, who argues that moral value could have the same ontological status as color. ${ }^{18}$ For McDowell, color is a secondary quality and as such exists as a relational or dispositional property between external objects and perceivers. For example, the color red consists in the disposition of an object to produce in an observer red perceptions in appropriate epistemic situations. Though the perception is in the mind, the power that produces the perception is not: it is ontologically grounded in external states of affairs that exist in the belief-independent way discussed above, for example, reflectance properties of physical surfaces. Color just is this power. In an analogous way, moral values could exist as powers to produce corresponding moral perceptions. This model is an attempt to preserve the realism of moral values by locating them in states of affairs that are independent of the beliefs of any agent, in the sense that the states of affairs do not obtain solely in virtue of the fact that there are beliefs about them.

The advantage of this kind of dispositional model for realism is that it allows moral values to exist independently of beliefs, without thereby endorsing the implausible view that moral values exist independently of any human sensibility. Morality, after all, fundamentally concerns agents, in the sense that it is vacuous to express a moral claim without also referencing certain features of agents. Ignoring this feature of morality is what makes objectivism guilty of the objective blindness that Nagel eschews and the incoherence that Wiggins derides. Moral values can be belief-independently real even if the articulation of the values necessarily requires referencing features of agents. For example, moral claims such as "capital punishment is morally wrong" cannot be meaningfully expressed without reference to concepts such as death, rights, justice, desert, suffering, or deterrence, none of which in turn make sense independently of features of our biology, psychology, and social-political frameworks.

This is not to say that an agent cannot utter the words "capital punishment is morally wrong" without explicitly referencing such anthropocentric factors. Such expressions are uttered frequently with presumably
no deeper meta-ethical commitments in mind. Yet such an expression cries out for such meta-ethical unpacking. Relativists such as Mackie might unpack the utterance by arguing that the speaker tacitly assumes that wrongness exists as some objective property attached to instances of capital punishment, but that such a speaker is unconsciously committing a naïve error. Instead, for a relativist, the wrongness of capital punishment would consist in a certain enculturation of social norms that arose historically in response to certain contingent biological or sociological pressures. Realists, by contrast, would need to unpack the utterance by grounding the wrongness in something independent of such enculturation. But however such unpacking proceeds, it eventually must invoke anthropocentric concepts such as the ones mentioned above. To appreciate this point, we may imagine trying to explain the content of the sentence "capital punishment is morally wrong" to someone unfamiliar with the definition of "capital punishment." How else are we to define "capital punishment" without bringing anthropocentric concepts such as death, law, or government into the discussion?

The notion of unpacking is largely epistemological. We engage in such elaborations in order to understand and justify the claim that "capital punishment is morally wrong." However, it would be a drastic overstatement of the autonomy of metaphysics to argue that the epistemological nature of such unpacking has no metaphysical bearing. After all, such elaborations help reveal what the nature and essence of capital punishment is, and that is a metaphysical matter. The question then is what metaphysical model best accommodates the anthropocentric elaboration. For a realist, a dispositionalist account of value has a prima facie attraction in virtue of the fact that it purports to allow for at least some interplay between the existence of values and human sensibility. The challenge for dispositionalists is how to prevent the interplay from collapsing into the constructivism and relativism that realists wish to avoid.

To highlight how a dispositional model might be compatible with realism, a dispositionalist would insist that colors would still exist even in a world of no actual color perceivers. By analogy, moral values would still exist even in a world of no actual moral agents. In such scenarios, there would be no color or moral perceptions, since there would be no color or moral perceivers. But the powers to produce the corresponding color or moral perceptions in appropriately situated epistemic agents would still obtain even if there were no such agents. The colors and values would exist, as it were, un-actualized. Robert Schwartz, in his commentary on the meta-philosophy of J. L. Austin, has expressed this concept by critiquing the classic epistemological dichotomy between experiences which are taken from the world versus experiences which are given by the
world. Instead, Schwartz interprets Austin as arguing that, "visual experience results from contributions of both the environment and the perceiver, and these contributions are inextricably joined." ${ }^{19}$ In an analogous way, moral experience for a dispositional realist, results from inextricably joined relationships between an agent and belief-independent features of the world.

Though provocative, McDowell's defense of this sort of dispositional theory of moral value has been generally greeted with criticism. Objections to McDowell's view can be collated into two categories. On the one hand, many philosophers dispute McDowell's analysis of color and secondary qualities in general. This kind of objection usually stems from either alternate interpretations of the canon of philosophical texts related to secondary qualities, or else from contemporary accounts gleaned from color science that seem to suggest some form of color irrealism. ${ }^{20}$ On the other hand, there are philosophers who argue that, whatever the fate of color, moral values are fundamentally disanalogous. Here we will concentrate on the objection that there is a disanalogy. The view defended is that, whether or not any particular philosopher actually held a dispositional theory of secondary qualities and whether or not color itself is properly analyzed dispositionally, the relational ontology articulated above is a helpful way to see how realist values could still exist without being objective.

There are several ways in which colors and moral values might be thought disanalogous. One objection to McDowell's analogy has been articulated by Crispin Wright. ${ }^{21}$ Wright defends what he calls the order of determination test for whether or not a concept is constructive or extension-determining. The test is supposed to show whether it is our concept itself that determines which items fit the concept, or whether it is instead the items themselves that determine the concepts we have about them. Wright maintains that secondary qualities pass his test, but that moral values fail it. On Wright's view, secondary qualities are not beliefindependently real, but moral values are. Moral judgments track moral properties whereas color judgments constitute color properties.

Wright's order of determination test provides a nuanced and sophisticated way to support a disanalogy between value and secondary qualities. However, it is ironic to note that if his test is persuasive, then moral values emerge as more real than secondary qualities: realists lose the battle for the dispositional analogy, but appear to win the war for beliefindependence. Either way, Wright's test has several limitations. In particular, Wright thinks that one of the reasons why our concepts of secondary qualities are irrealist is because we are able to articulate a priori informative conditions for when we are epistemically justified in making
color judgments. The fact that the conditions serve as the best explanations of color judgments suggests that there is nothing more to color judgments than the satisfaction of the conditions and that, therefore, our color concepts determine their extensions rather than the other way around. Suffice it to say that this criterion for the order of determination test seems already to presuppose an irrealist interpretation of secondary qualities which McDowell does not accept. If secondary qualities are instead interpreted as powers located in external objects or states of affairs, then the extensions of color concepts, the powers themselves, determine the correct application of the concepts after all.

## 4. Color-Value Disanalogies

In addition to Wright's criticism, let us explore four additional objections to McDowell's view. First, it might be thought that whereas color terms are predicated of objects, moral values are instead predicated of events, actions, and characters. The objection here is that to make the color-value analogy is to commit some kind of category mistake by conflating objects with actions and events. An initial response to this objection is to point out that McDowell's comparison of value to color is only supposed to be suggestive of an analogy. This does not mean that the two need to be identical in sharing all and only the same features and properties. It is not damaging to the color-value analogy as an analogy that there are minor differences. However, a more persuasive response would be to deny that there is any category mistake involved in making the color-value analogy in the first place. For one thing, it may be possible to rephrase descriptions of events and actions in terms of strings of objects and properties, such that to predicate something of an action is no different than to predicate something of multiple individual objects. For another thing, we know that our manifest image of objects as macroscopic solids bearing colors is not supported by our scientific image of objects as composed of microscopic entities. We predicate color of manifest objects, but if manifest objects are themselves relations between smaller scientific objects, then color is in fact predicated on relations. If this is right, then there is no disanalogy with values being predicated of events. To put the matter differently, there is no disanalogy between color and value if we think of the surface-reflectance properties of objects upon which colors supervene, as well as the actions and intentions upon which moral values supervene, as all simply different sorts of states of affairs.

A second alleged disanalogy between color and value is sometimes expressed by noting that, while color is psychologically inefficacious,
morality is intrinsically motivating. Simon Blackburn phrases this objection by claiming that morality is importantly always relative to some role, whereas color "just sits there."22 However, while moral talk and color talk are certainly used in different ways and for different purposes, it would be an overstatement of this disanalogy to say that only morality is motivating, and that only color just sits there. For one thing, it is not clear that a moral realist, even on a dispositionalist theory like McDowell's, needs to be committed to moral values being intrinsically motivating. Indeed, it seems possible for an individual to possess certain types of moral beliefs, and yet be unmoved to act. It is also misleading to say that color just sits there in a completely causally inert way. After all, the colors of things determine how we sort the things. The sorting is not merely aesthetic: it seems plausible that color judgments can play vital evolutionary roles as well. For example, certain colors may indicate that something is poisonous. In this way, the color of an object can motivate us to avoid it. Again, the point here is not to defend a particular view of moral motivation, but merely to preserve an analogy. If color is not motivationally efficacious, then neither does morality need to be; and if color is ultimately motivationally efficacious, then morality can be too.

Blackburn also argues that it is possible for us as human beings to change in a way that would cause us to see everything as blue which we now see as red. This suggests a third potential disanalogy, since a realist would not want to say that we could similarly change to think of everything as bad which we currently think of as good. On his own version of this disanalogy, Blackburn points out that if our moral perceptions did change such that we started regarding as good everything we currently regard as bad, we would judge our new perceptions to be horribly mistaken from the perspective of our current perceptions. However, this still cannot support a disanalogy with color, since we would also judge inverted color perceptions as horribly mistaken, albeit not morally horrible, from the perspective of our current color perceptions. Indeed, accounting for a change in moral perception as constituting a mistake seems to presuppose a standard of moral value that is independent of what we currently think about or could ever come to think about it, and this sounds extremely similar to what a realist wants to say all along.

Indeed, the scenario of changed color perceptions seems supported by the possibility of such phenomena as inverted spectra and absent qualia. Why could such phenomena not be possible in an analogous way in the case of moral values? For example, we think that most non-human animals have different mental faculties than we do, and we also think that most animals are not aware of moral values as we are. This is why we do not think it appropriate to morally judge them. We typically do not treat
non-human animals as legitimate moral agents, whatever their status as moral patients. Likewise, certain psychological pathologies may cause individuals so afflicted to think of morality in a way very different than we do, or maybe not to think of it at all. On this understanding, the problem with an amoralist, for example, is that such a person suffers from a kind of moral absent qualia.

It is possible that we could change to be more like animals or psychopaths, and thereby cease perceiving the moral values that we do. But this change in perception should not make us think that moral values are not thereby real. On a dispositionalist model of value, values and colors both exist as powers in external states of affairs to produce certain responses in appropriately situated epistemic agents. If we radically changed in our color or moral perceptual capacities, an advocate of a dispositionalist model could account for this by arguing that we are simply no longer occupying the appropriate epistemic situation, but the powers to produce color and moral experiences would not be affected by such a change in us. After all, we do not think that moral value is illusory because animals do not partake in it, just as we do not think gamma rays are not real despite our being epistemically unequipped to directly perceive them.

David Lewis has also defended a dispositionalist account of moral value in an attempt to address this putative disanalogy, which Lewis optimistically calls "the only disturbing aspect of the dispositional theory.", ${ }^{23}$ To accommodate this disanology, Lewis concedes that values are ultimately contingent, not necessary. Lewis's version of dispositionalism is very sophisticated, but it is not properly realist in the way specified above. On his account, values are reduced ontologically and semantically to facts about human psychology. Lewis himself calls this a form of realism, at least in a loose sense, but not realism in the sense of beliefindependent correspondence to features of the external world. Indeed, if values can be reduced merely to facts about our psychology it is not even clear that such a loose realism needs to be cognitivist at all.

Finally, a fourth disanalogy between colors and values might be located in the observation that we disagree much more about moral matters than we do about color. This disanalogy, though, seems misleading for several reasons. For one thing, it is not clear that we actually disagree about morality to the extent often purported. Much research in anthropology and cross-cultural moral psychology suggests that there might be a large degree of deep-structure similarity underlying many putative moral disagreements. This possibility has been offered from theoretical as well as empirical quarters. For example, Michele MoodyAdams has articulated persuasive hermeneutical reasons to think that the
extent of moral disagreement cannot be so great as to render it incomprehensible to us as a disagreement in the first place. ${ }^{24}$ Moreover, a certain understanding of the "Principle of Charity" might engender the recognition of more moral agreement on fundamental values than is otherwise evident at first glance. ${ }^{25}$ Albeit from a relativist perspective, David Wong has also argued that the degree of moral disagreement must be constrained to a certain degree by his view of the coordinative function of morality: since there are only so many ways to successfully coordinate intra- and interpersonal conflict, the number of acceptable reference-fixing descriptions will be not be infinite. ${ }^{26}$ Jonathan Haidt and Richard Shweder have also offered empirical considerations that suggest that moral differences tend to collate around a constrained, finite set of shared values. ${ }^{27}$

In addition, just as the alleged disanalogy might have us underappreciate moral agreement, it also might have us over-appreciate the extent of color agreement. For example, while there is much cross-cultural agreement about certain basic or so-called paradigm colors, there is much less agreement about shades and uncommon colors. ${ }^{28}$ This is not merely a function of not being familiar with the names of the colors. Instead, it seems plausible to say that there is sometimes an actual epistemic difference between color perceptions. For example, a trained artist may actually see more colors than someone who is untrained. Such a person may be able to distinguish two shades of blue in a way that an untrained person cannot, even if the untrained person is familiar with the names for each color. Color is like taste in this way: an expert wine-taster will be able to identify more tastes in a wine, or differences between two similar wines, than a non-expert, even if the non-expert's wine vocabulary is very good. The non-expert simply cannot taste a difference; but we would not conclude from the non-expert's ignorance that there is actually no difference, especially when it is revealed that the wine-makers really included the things that the expert tasted. There is no disanalogy here with moral value. In both cases, we agree on basic or paradigm cases: blue versus red, sweet versus dry wine, and torturing babies versus giving to charity. We similarly disagree on finer discernments: lemon yellow versus school bus yellow, a 1989 Sauternes versus a 1990 Sauternes, and whether we should we tell a lie to produce a greater good or not.

## 5. Meriting Versus Eliciting

Moral realists should jettison any commitment to objectivism. Not only does a commitment to objectivism suggest an implausible ontology of
objects, but it seems to require that values be completely disconnected from the constitution and sensibilities of actual moral agents. Instead, McDowell's secondary quality analogy is an excellent model for a moral realism without objectivism: moral values exist independently of any beliefs we may have about them, but are nonetheless defined dispositionally in reference to features of moral agents.

However, there is an additional objection to the account of dispositional moral realism under consideration which needs to be examined. To see the force of this final objection, it is important to reflect again on the nature of dispositional properties as discussed above: dispositions are articulated by reference to the potentiality of the related things whose existence would actualize them. The disposition of the color purple requires mentioning not only which potential wavelengths of light or surface reflectance properties would be necessary for there to be purple experiences, but also the potential existence of perceptual apparatuses capable of picking up any such light or reflectance. Thus, the color purple interpreted dispositionally would still exist even if one or both of these related things did not actually exist, as long as their possibility could be appropriately articulated.

This requirement, though, seems to present a realist with another disanaology between secondary qualities and moral values. According to dispositional moral realists, moral values would have to be articulated by reference to potential moral agents, just as purple would require potential color observers. Again, in neither case is the existence of the value or color as a disposition impugned by the lack of actual existence of such perceivers; what is required is only potential perceivers. The problem is that, while we can articulate the conditions for potential color perception, the conditions for potential moral perception seem different. The difference, on the present objection, is that moral values are essentially prescriptive in a way that colors are not.

McDowell himself recognized this disanalogy between values and colors. As he notes: "The disanalogy, now, is that a virtue (say) is conceived to be not merely such as to elicit the appropriate 'attitude' (as a colour is merely such as to cause the appropriate experiences), but rather such as to merit it." ${ }^{29}$ To help explain the alleged disanalogy, McDowell offers a comparison to the quality of fearfulness or dangerousness. According to McDowell, fearfulness, as opposed to fear itself, shares common ontological characteristics with his picture of realist moral values. Both exist as external states of affairs that obtain independently of anyone's belief in them, even though the content of each necessarily requires mentioning features of agents. As we saw earlier, we must distinguish the claim that something is expressed by reference to features
of agents from the claim that it exists only in virtue of beliefs, agreements or endorsements of agents. Thus, something is really fearful whether or not there are any actual feelings of fear, even though it would be impossible to coherently talk about fearfulness without mentioning certain aspects of human beings which make the fearful thing dangerous to us.

McDowell's point is that whereas color causes us to have certain reactions, fearfulness and moral values merit certain reactions. McDowell is not entirely explicit about what "meriting" means, but to distinguish it from mere eliciting, we might say that meriting a response implies that the response is not necessarily guaranteed. Thus, to merit a response means that we ought to have the response, even if we do not in fact have it. In this way, fearfulness merits fear in the sense that we should be afraid of dangerous things, even if we are not. This seems the only tenable way to significantly contrast meriting from mere eliciting.

However, if this is the only way to distinguish meriting and eliciting, then it seems that the distinction no longer constitutes a disanalogy between value and color. For one thing, it may be possible for a realist about moral values to reject ethical internalism, the view that moral beliefs necessarily and inherently engage our will in some way. Merely rejecting motivational internalism does not address the meriting claim, since to merit a response does not require that the response is always actually present. However, if it is possible for a realist to jettison internalism about reasons, the view that moral beliefs inherently supply justifying reasons for acting without necessarily supplying the actual motivation to act, then moral values do not need to merit a response. However, realists should be extremely hesitant to abandon reasons internalism. If they do not supply reasons that would justify action or express obligations for what we should do, it is no longer clear why moral judgments would be recognized as moral at all.

Assuming that moral realists must maintain some form of reasons internalism, an alternative way to deal with the problem of meriting might instead be to argue that colors themselves should not be understood on the eliciting model. After all, colors do not elicit actual color experiences in colorblind people or in perceivers equipped with different sensitivities to the electromagnetic spectrum. We could say that colors elicit color experience in humans ceteris paribus, but this is equally true of moral values: they elicit motivation to act all things being equal. It could be objected that even if colors do not always elicit experiences, they still do not merit responses, and that is enough to secure a disanalogy with values. However, is it really so odd to conceive of colors as themselves meriting responses in some way? Indeed, the fact that colors are real might itself merit our perception of them such that a colorblind person
should, in some sense, perceive colors because the colors are really there. Obviously the sense of "should" here is not associated with moral responsibility, since we do not blame people who are colorblind for being insensitive to colors. However, such a sense of "should" is nonetheless normative in a non-moral way, since we do after all describe a colorblind person as suffering from a deficiency. How else are we to make this assessment, unless we are appealing to a standard of what the color perceptions of a colorblind person should normally be like?

There would still be a disanalogy between values and colors, though, if the sort of ceteris paribus conditions for reliable perception were radically different in the cases of color versus value experience. However, when we examine scenarios in which we recognize that color perception is not reliable, we find that the analogies to moral perception are plausible. For example, color perception is not veridical, if the perceiver is not wearing corrective eyewear when needed. By analogy, so too is moral perception defeated in cases were the perceiver lacks the requisite epistemic apparatus. Exactly what the apparatus will be in the moral case will depend on what theory of moral knowledge we think is accurate. Theories that associate moral knowledge with the possession of certain cognitive capacities or emotions will require us to reject any moral perceptions in which the perceiver lacks the capacities or emotions. For example, say we are persuaded by Antonio Damasio's findings about how pathologies of the pre-frontal cortex enable psychopathic behavior or by R.J. Blair's work identifying a "violence inhibition mechanism" in humans beings, the possession of which is necessary for the ability to draw the moralconventional distinction. ${ }^{30}$ If such theories are on the right track, then putative moral perception would be defeated in cases where the perceiver lacked things such as a healthy pre-frontal lobe or a violence inhibition mechanism. This is no different than rejecting the veridicality of color judgments of a person with bad eyes. The point here is not to say what specific theory of moral epistemology is correct. The point is simply that the possession of a theory of moral knowledge will provide epistemic conditions for when moral perception is veridical and when it is not, and in an analogous way to color perception.

Let us consider another situation in which we judge color perception unreliable: viewing an object in colored, ambient light. For example, an orange object will not appear orange if viewed in red light. Value experience again seems analogous to this phenomenon. Moral perception may also be defeated in environments, say, of extreme moral depravity or extreme moral beneficence, because the background moral atmosphere partly shapes our moral judgments. A harmless white lie might be permissible in our world, but judged a horrifying transgression in some
ideal moral heaven. A simple act of sharing may be viewed as trivially expected in this world, whereas it may take on a heroic tone when performed in a Hobbesian state of nature. Similarly, we often express heightened moral praise for a right action performed by someone from whom we typically do not expect much; just as we can often be harsher in judging the moral failure of someone whom we hold to very high standards. It seems plausible to think that evaluating an action or character in such environments might tend to distort the actual moral status of the act or character. It is not that an incontinent person who finally acts rightly is really more praiseworthy than an continent person who slips up just once: it is just that the actions seem more or less pronounced relative to our background understanding of each character. Just as an orange object will not look orange in a red-lit room, neither might a praiseworthy action appear as such in a moral heaven, nor a blameworthy action seem blameworthy in a moral wasteland.

The significant influence that non-moral environments can have on moral judgment has further been documented in a study by Haidt et al., in which it was found that poor and uneducated classes in both Brazil and America draw the moral-conventional distinction in fundamentally different ways than do upper-class and educated citizens within the same cultures. ${ }^{31}$ Whereas "victimless yet offensive actions" are judged merely conventionally wrong or disgusting by educated Brazilians and Americans alike, they are judged morally wrong by poor or less-educated individuals in both cultures. Haidt et al. explain this result by noting that the educated individuals based their judgments on a criterion of harm while the uneducated individuals based their judgments on their own emotional responses. What this suggests is that less education and lower socioeconomic status are associated with greater affectivity, which in turn is associated with a conflation of moral and conventional offenses. Education and the lack of education arguably qualify as relevantly different epistemic positions, just as it is plausible to claim that the lack of certain basic material conditions can and does impede moral sensitivity.

Finally, we are also familiar with moral analogies to unreliable color perception due to visual distance. Peter Singer, for example, argues that spatial distance can also distort our moral perceptions about the scope of our obligations to help others. From Singer's perspective, the moral judgment that we have no obligations to aid someone on the other side of the world simply because the person is far away bespeaks an egregious moral blindness. Such a moral judgment based on mere distance would be rejected by Singer in the same way that a visual judgment about an object very far away would be rejected.

## 6. Conclusion

Moral realism might be objectionable for a host of other reasons, but it should not be rejected solely because of an impoverished ontology. Realism becomes more ontologically palatable when it is distinguished from objectivism, despite a frequent conflation of the two views. One charitable model for real, but not objective values is McDowell's analogy to dispositional properties. This is not the only metaphysical platform available to realists, but dispositionalism has the advantage of allowing for a certain degree of dependence between agents and values. A defense of this sort of dispositionalism has been mounted here by responding to alleged disanalogies between values and secondary qualities, particularly the objection that values merit whereas colors merely elicit responses. If this defense of dispositionalism as advanced by McDowell is persuasive, moral realism at the least gains some influential companions in guilt which we should be loathe to abandon. Specifically, the dispositional model of value is in good ontological company with secondary qualities, and it preserves a certain realism about values without retreating to a Platonic otherworldliness that would divorce morality too much from human sensibility and betray its essentially practical nature. ${ }^{32}$

## Notes

1. J.L. Mackie, Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong (New York: Penguin Books, 1977), p. 17.
2. See John McDowell, "Value as a Secondary Quality," in Geoffrey-Sayre-McCord, ed. Essays on Moral Realism (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1998).
3. See Richard Boyd, "How To Be a Moral Realist," in Geoffrey Sayre-McCord, ed. op. cit.; also see David Brink, Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 7, and Russ Shafer-Landau, Moral Realism: A Defense (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), p. 2.
4. See J. L. Mackie, op. cit.; see also James Rachels, Elements of Moral Philosophy (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978), Mark Platts, Reference, Truth and Reality (London: Routledge, 1980), and David Wong, Moral Relativity (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1984).
5. See Brink, op. cit., ch. 2.
6. See Peter Railton, "Aesthetic Value, Moral Value, and the Ambitions of Naturalism," in Jerrold Levinson, ed. Aesthetics and Ethics (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press 1998).
7. See Williams, op. cit.; see also David McNaughton, Moral Vision (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1988), p. 83-85, Barry Stroud The Quest for Reality (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), ch. 1, and J.J.C. Smart Philosophy and Scientific Realism (London: Routledge, 1963).
8. See Williams, op. cit., pp. 138-139; see also Smart, op. cit., p. 151.
9. Railton, op. cit., p. 63 .
10. See Thomas Nagel, The View from Nowhere (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986).
11. See David Wiggins, "Truth, Invention, and The Meaning of Life," Proceedings of the British Academy 62 (1976).
12. Mackie, op. cit., p. 23.
13. Mackie, op. cit., p. 42.
14. Brink, op. cit., p. 6.
15. See David Lewis, "Dispositional Theories of Value," in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 63 (1989).
16. See G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1903); see also Russ Shafer-Landau, op cit.
17. See Richard Boyd, op. cit.; see also David Brink, op. cit., Nicholas Sturgeon "Moral Explanations," in Sayre-McCord, op. cit., Frank Jackson From Metaphysics to Ethics (Oxford: Oxford University Press 1998), and Peter Railton "Moral Realism," Philosophical Review 85, 1986.
18. See Mackie, op. cit., pp. 19-20.
19. Robert Schwartz, Visual Versions (Cambridge Mass.: MIT Press 2006), p. 250.
20. See Jonathan Bennett, Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971), pp. 10-11) and Rae Langton, Kantian Humility (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), ch. 7; see also Christopher Peacocke, "Color Concepts and Color Experience," Synthese 58, (1984) and Mark Johnston "How To Speak of the Colors," Philosophical Studies 68, (1992).
21. See Crispin Wright, op cit.
22. See Blackburn, op cit., ch. 8 .
23. Lewis, op cit., pp. 88-89.
24. See Michele Moody-Adams, Fieldwork in Familiar Places (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press 1997).
25. See Rachels, op cit.
26. See Wong, op cit.
27. See Jonathan Haidt, "Intuitive Ethics: How Innately Prepared Intuitions Generate Culturally Variable Virtues," Daedalus (2004), p. 55-66; see also Richard Shweder, et al. "The Big Three of Morality (Autonomy, Community, and Divinity) and the Bbig Three Explanations of Suffering as Well," in Morality and Health, Allan Brandt and Paul Rozin, eds. (New York: Routledge, 1997).
28. See B. Berlin and P. Kay, Basic Color Terms (Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1969).
29. McDowell, "Values as Secondary Qualities," op. cit. p. 143.
30. See Antonio Damasio, Descartes' Error (New York: Harper Collins, 1995); see also R.J. Blair "A Cognitive Developmental Approach to Morality: Investigating the Psychopath," Cognition 57 (1995).
31. See Jonathan Haidt, et al. "Affect, Culture, and Morality, or Is It Wrong to Eat Your Dog?", Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65 (1993).
32. I would like to thank two anonymous referees and the Editor-in-Chief of this journal, Thomas Magnell, for their very thoughtful comments and generous assistance. This article was also made possible by a faculty development grant from Converse College.
