# Kant's Theory of Mind in the Critique of Pure Reason's Subjective Deduction* 

MATT McCORMICK<br>Department of Philosophy, California State University, Sacramento,<br>CA, 95819-6033, USA; e-mail: mccormick@csus.edu

## 1. Introduction

In a brief and obscure remark, Kant says that there are both Objective and Subjective Deductions contained in the Transcendental Deduction, the heart of the Critique of Pure Reason. ${ }^{1}$ Commentators have disagreed about what the Subjective Deduction is. They have taken it to be a wide variety of things, most of them negative. They have also disagreed about which part of the Critique of Pure Reason it occupies. The commentators fall roughly into two categories with regard to it: commentators who are unsympathetic with its heavily psychological language and agenda, and commentators who believe that while it is psychological, it contains important, defensible arguments in Kant's philosophy of mind. In an effort to salvage something of value from it, some commentators in the first group like Henry Allison have said that the Subjective Deduction is an aborted argument for the categories. ${ }^{2}$ Peter Strawson, also in the first group, makes no attempt to repair what he believes is a hopelessly mistaken argument because it contains illegitimate speculations about mental functions that are beyond the proper reach of our knowledge. ${ }^{3} \mathrm{H}$. W. Cassirer also flatly rejects it because psychological claims like the claims contained in the Subjective Deduction stem from "the fact that Kant himself is somewhat confused," and that "whenever such language [psychological] occurs, one must first of all, substitute epistemological terms for psychological ones, and it is only after this has been done that one can raise the question whether Kant's reasoning may be allowed to stand.". 4

The second group of commentators have embraced the Subjective Deduction and argued that it presents the transcendental requirements placed on the mind of a subject who is capable of cognition. Kant's[^0]arguments in the Objective Deduction for the necessary structure of objects are well-known. Andrew Brook, Patricia Kitcher, Ralf Meerbote, and even Norman Kemp Smith say that the Subjective Deduction is no less important for describing the necessary features of the subject. ${ }^{5}$ Brook portrays it as a preliminary argument to Kant's attack on rational psychology in the Paralogisms, and he argues that the Subjective Deduction is actually an indispensable part of the Objective Deduction. ${ }^{6}$ Kitcher portrays it as an argument concerning the phenomenal or empirical self, and she also argues that "The objective and subjective Deductions are inseparable and can be distinguished only in terms of focus." ${ }^{" 7}$ One way we can describe the rift between these two sets of commentators is over whether the Subjective Deduction is a dispensable or indispensable part of Kant's critical philosophy.

The challenge for any sympathetic reading of the Subjective Deduction, however, is that Kant himself seems to hold that it is dispensable. In the A edition of the Critique of Pure Reason, he downplays its significance, saying that the Objective Deduction will stand without it, and in the B edition he appears to have removed much of what was the Subjective Deduction altogether. ${ }^{8}$ Commentators in the first group have taken these indicators from Kant to mean that the Subjective Deduction and other psychological discussions in the Critique of Pure Reason should be removed and that Kant recognized this in the $\mathrm{B}$ edition, making it the authoritative statement of Kant's position. A central task for anyone who wishes to defend the Subjective Deduction is to explain why it appears that Kant did not.

We will consider an explanation for Kant's comments about the Subjective Deduction that makes it clear that he did not lose confidence in the argument, or think that it played no role in his critical philosophy. Kant did not view it as indispensable to his larger goals of the Critique of Pure Reason as the commentators in the second group have maintained. The purpose served by the Subjective Deduction does not address his most central goal of defining the limits of knowledge with regard to metaphysics. Nevertheless, Kant consistently maintained that the arguments of the Subjective Deduction do a "great service" and are "meritorious."9 His reasons for reducing or changing it in the B edition were primarily to clarify another argument, but not because he rejected or doubted its arguments.

The position between the two positions that we will consider will make it possible to present a sympathetic reconstruction of the Subjective Deduction that sheds light on Kant's goals in the Critique of Pure Reason, particularly the most enigmatic chapter, the Transcendental Deduction. The central purpose behind the Subjective Deduction is to enumerate
a number of theses about the necessary character of a mind that is capable of making judgments about objects. Kant calls this ability cognition which, "involves two components: first, the concept (the category), through which an object as such is thought; and second, the intuition, through which the object is given." ${ }^{10}$ Inasmuch as Kant also equates having cognitions of objects with having experience of objects, he means the same thing by "the categories apply to cognition," and "the categories apply to objects of experience."${ }^{" 11}$ Kant identifies thinking as a larger class of mental activity. Thinking employs concepts, but it need not have intuitions of an object. We can think about God, for example, but he is not a proper object of cognition, or knowledge. While many of the claims of the Subjective Deduction apply to thinking, the argument is best construed as being confined to cognition, which is a necessary but not sufficient condition for knowledge of the objects of experience. Kant presents us with a list of required faculties for the mind and arguments that show their necessary, hence transcendental, role in the performance of the mental act of applying concepts to representations in judgment.

## 2. The Two Deductions of the Transcendental Deduction

The difference between the Objective and Subjective Deductions, Kant says, is a difference in content in the arguments. The Objective Deduction, Kant says, "refers to the objects of pure understanding, and is intended to expound and render intelligible the objective validity of its a priori concepts." ${ }^{12}$ He says that the Transcendental Deduction fulfills this purpose by "determining the rules and limits" of the employment of the understanding. ${ }^{13}$ The central question of the Objective Deduction is always, "What and how much can the understanding and reason know apart from all experience?","14

Classically, Kant's characterization of the Objective Deduction has been taken to mean that it is about the logical and semantic requirements of having cognition of objects. Norman Kemp Smith says that the Objective Deduction "enquires how concepts which are a priori, and which as a priori must be taken to originate in pure reason, can yet be valid of objects". ${ }^{15}$ There are numerous interpretations concerning this portion of the Critique of Pure Reason. The most common view, however, is that the purpose behind the Objective Deduction, and the Transcendental Deduction chapter that contains it, is to show that the pure, a priori concepts, the categories, are objectively valid. The categories apply universally and necessarily to all objects that can be cognized or experienced.

By contrast, the Subjective Deduction, Kant says, allows us to "investigate the pure understanding itself, its possibility and cognitive faculties upon which it rests; and so deals with it in its subjective aspect." ${ }^{16}$ Given the characterization of the Objective Deduction that Kant offers, we can see that he intends for the Subjective Deduction to be concerned with the faculties that are needed for a mind to have experience of objects. The Subjective Deduction is typically taken to be psychological in nature because it examines the "generative processes to whose agency human knowledge is due." ${ }^{17}$ One confusion concerning the claims about cognitive faculties is whether they are to serve as premises in an argument for some other conclusion, such as the objective validity of the categories, or whether the claims Kant makes in the Subjective Deduction are themselves the conclusions of arguments. We will reconstruct the Subjective Deduction as an argument that cognition about the objects of experience necessarily presupposes a number of faculties or features in the mind of the subject who makes the judgments.

## 3. Two Obstacles to a Sympathetic Interpretation of the Subjective Deduction

In the introduction to the A edition of the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant seems to discredit the Subjective Deduction. "Objective Deduction," Kant says:

refers to the objects of pure understanding and is intended to establish and make comprehensible the objective validity of understanding's a priori concepts, and precisely because of this pertains to my purposes essentially. The other side [the Subjective Deduction] seeks to examine pure understanding itself as regards its possibility and the cognitive powers underlying it in turn, and hence seeks to examine it in a subjective respect. And although this latter exposition is of great importance for my main purpose, it does not pertain to it essentially. For the main question is always this: what, and how much, can understanding and reason cognize independently of all experience? rather than: how is our power of thought itself possible? This latter question is, as it were, a search for the cause of a given effect, and to that extent there is something about it resembling a hypothesis (even though in fact, as I shall show on another occasion, it is not so). Thus it seems as if in this case I have permitted myself to hold an opinion, and that the reader must hence be free to hold a different opinion. On this point I must ask the reader in
advance to remember this: should my subjective deduction have failed to produce in him the full conviction that I expect it to produce, yet the objective deduction, with which I am concerned above all, will still acquire its full force; perhaps what I say on pages [A] 92 to 93 is even sufficient for this all by itself. ${ }^{18}$

Kant makes several claims regarding the Subjective Deduction here. The examination of the possibility of the pure understanding and its cognitive powers in the subject is inessential to some purpose Kant has. Kant's main question concerns what can be known independently of all experience, not how our power of thought is possible. His analysis of the power of thought resembles a hypothesis, but it is not one. Kant believes it will appear that his Subjective Deduction is merely an opinion about which the reader may differ. Even if his Subjective Deduction fails to convince, the Objective Deduction, which is his central concern, will retain its full force and succeed in convincing where the Subjective Deduction might fail. At first glance, it would appear that Kant does not think much of the plausibility or usefulness of the Subjective Deduction, so defending it without his support would be odd. The Subjective Deduction is inessential to some purpose that Kant has in mind for the Transcendental Deduction chapter, and the purpose, Kant maintains, is not to analyze how thought is possible. There are at least two possibilities. It might be inessential to Kant's overall aim in the Critique of Pure Reason of providing a complete account of the nature of knowledge so that the possibility, character, and boundaries of metaphysics can be determined, or the Subjective Deduction may be inessential to one of Kant's other goals within his larger plan. ${ }^{19}$ In fact, the Subjective Deduction is inessential to the goals set out for the Objective Deduction. Immediately following the passage in the preface, Kant directs us to A 92-93 to settle the issue concerning the function and importance of the Subjective and Objective Deductions. There it becomes clear which goal the Subjective Deduction is inessential to. The overall aim of the Transcendental Deduction is to prove that "the objective validity of the categories as a priori concepts rests, therefore, on the fact that, so far as the form of thought is concerned, through them alone does experience become possible.,"20 It is only by "demonstration of the a priori validity of the categories in respect of all objects of our senses, [that] the purpose of the deduction [will] be fully attained.,"21 At the outset and in the conclusions of the arguments in both editions, Kant makes it clear that his central purpose is to show that our cognitive access to objects is limited by the categories to the spatio-temporal, empirical world. ${ }^{22}$ Arguing for this limitation in turn, allows Kant to answer his larger question of the Critique
of Pure Reason and the Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics whether such a thing as metaphysics is even possible. He concludes, as is well known, that knowledge of the non-empirical world is impossible, which we may call his limitation thesis.

Kant's larger goal in the Critique of Pure Reason is to prove the limitation thesis. His goal in the Transcendental Deduction is to show by way of the Objective Deduction that the categories necessarily and universally apply to all objects of experience. After that Kant can argue that no other knowledge producing application of the categories is possible. Therefore, knowledge beyond that of the objects of experience is impossible. The limitation thesis is proven, and it is served directly only by the Objective Deduction of the Transcendental Deduction. Strictly speaking, the Subjective Deduction is tangential to the proof of the limitation thesis because it explains how judgments are produced by cognitive and precognitive processes, but the Subjective Deduction does not allow us to make claims on its basis alone about what the domain of knowledge or metaphysics is. Thus Kant says that the Objective Deduction will succeed even if the Subjective Deduction fails. Only the Objective Deduction, according to which the possibility of cognition of objects necessarily presupposes the categories, is crucial to limiting the range of knowledge. The Subjective Deduction is inessential to that purpose since its sole interest is determining what cognitive powers or faculties are possessed by the pure understanding and how they function in cognition. Kant's comment in the preface, therefore, should not lead us to belittle the importance of the Subjective Deduction as a whole, or as an important theory of mind in its own right.

One of the other goals behind the Critique of Pure Reason is to determine all of the conditions that make empirical cognition possible. The Subjective Deduction plays a crucial role in achieving the goal, and that is why Kant repeatedly speaks positively of it: "Such an investigation of the first strivings of our faculty of knowledge, whereby it advances from particular perceptions to universal concepts, is undoubtedly of great service," and, "the question how [the categories] make such a form of thought possible is indeed important enough for completing this deduction, where possible; but with reference to the main purpose of the system, namely, the determination of the boundary of pure reason, the answer to how is in no way necessary but is merely meritorious.,"23 We shall see that the Subjective Deduction contains a number of transcendental claims about the nature of a judging subject which will be crucial to understanding Kant's aim of explaining how it is that empirical cognition of objects is possible for a discursive consciousness. While the Subjective Deduction is inessential to the argument for the objective validity of the
categories, and hence the limitation thesis, it is a necessary part of Kant's full account of empirical cognition. ${ }^{24}$

Kant is also concerned that the reader may dismiss the Subjective Deduction as merely hypothetical or just an opinion. Kant does not believe that his Subjective Deduction is a mere hypothesis or opinion; he is addressing the possibility that a reader may be dismissive because of the misunderstanding. We may ask why he is concerned about these misunderstandings. Within the context of the work of many of his contemporaries and predecessors, Kant sees many psychological arguments as philosophically suspect. The success of the argument for the limitation thesis severely curtails what sort of knowledge is possible. Several classes of psychological claims, some of which closely resemble Kant's own, fall outside the boundaries.

Kant does not want his work to be mistaken for empirical psychology, for instance, which he defines as the study of inner sense. ${ }^{25} \mathrm{He}$ explicitly denies that what he is doing is in any regard a "physiology of the human understanding-like that of the celebrated Locke."26 In the Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, he denies that a "science of the soul" is even possible, because mental states, the subject matter of empirical psychology, are not in space, hence they are not quantifiable mathematically. ${ }^{27}$ Furthermore, the method of empirical psychology is a posteriori. While claims like Anne Treisman's that, "the perception of meaningful wholes in the visual world apparently depends on complex operations to which a person has no conscious access, operations that can only be inferred on the basis of indirect evidence," sound Kantian, the type of analysis of object judgments that Kant and Treisman are engaged in are fundamentally different. ${ }^{28}$ Kant characterizes a cognitive act, such as judging objects on the basis of sensory input, and deduces the universal and necessary requirements placed on any mind that is capable of performing the act, whereas Treisman and empirical psychologists conduct an a posteriori study of the human cognitive system, whatever the contingent structures or capacities it may turn out to have.

Kant does not want his arguments to be mistaken for rational psychology which takes the judgment, "I think," as its subject matter and to support the existence of an immaterial, simple, substantial soul. Kant's chapter on paralogisms is devoted to explaining the failure of proponents of rational psychology to properly grasp the boundaries of what can be known about a self. Kant is well aware that his argument in the Subjective Deduction, a work in transcendental psychology, is easily misunderstood, particularly in light of his argument for the limitation thesis. While he is philosophically committed to the arguments given in the Subjective Deduction, they are prone to be misconstrued as mere hypotheses like the
claims of rational and empirical psychology. He is understandably reluctant to advance his own psychological theses given the carefully demarcated and somewhat narrow position his transcendental psychology occupies between empirical and rational psychologies.

The best way to understand the crucial passages where Kant seems dismissive of the Subjective Deduction is that while it is not central to the primary goal of the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant does not reduce or reject the Subjective Deduction on philosophical grounds. What remains then is to determine what sort of argument it is. We have started to characterize it as an exercise in transcendental psychology. "Transcendental" means many things for Kant, but in this context he intends a transcendental investigation into the sources of knowledge to be an inquiry that discloses the universal and necessary features of empirical cognition. The arguments are psychological because they offer an explanation of how cognition is generated in terms of the faculties and abilities of the mind of the subject who thinks. The full defense for this robust interpretation of the Subjective Deduction is not yet in place. We can see, however, that not only is there room for this kind of characterization of the Subjective Deduction, but that it is compatible with all of Kant's remarks in the A edition preface. It makes sense of Kant's various tiered goals and their relationship in the Critique of Pure Reason, it allows us to attribute consistency to Kant in applying the critical or transcendental method to the subject who judges as well as the object that is judged, and it allows us to understand the revisions between the two editions.

The prospects for a sympathetic reading of the Subjective Deduction might look dim when we consider the revisions that Kant makes to the second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason. The threefold synthesis discussion that leads the discussion in the A edition appears to be missing or has been changed. Kant seems to have de-psychologized the discussion, changing much of the synthesis of the imagination language to general talk about combination. Whereas Kant devotes the majority of the space to the theory of synthesis in the A edition with the categories only getting mentioned at the end of the section, in the second edition, Kant takes up the role of the categories in cognition earlier and makes them central with the discussion of mind and mental faculties shortened and primarily at the end.

Kant makes a decisive and illuminating comment about the rather dramatic revisions in the B edition Transcendental Deduction in a footnote in The Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, which was published between the A and B editions. In the footnote, Kant expresses his resolve to revise the Transcendental Deduction argument because some of his critics had stated doubts about his attempts to restrict knowledge to the empirical realm. Kant concedes that the manner of
presentation of the argument in the A edition is obscure. But he remains committed to the "ground of explanation, which is already given correctly there., ${ }^{29}$ He makes it clear that the difference between his two ways of presenting the argument is methodological. The A edition, where the Subjective Deduction dominates, does not directly show that cognition is confined to the empirical realm because it focuses first on "the solution of the problem as to how experience is possible by means of these categories, and only by means of them." ${ }^{30}$ The inquiry into how the categories make experience possible is an inquiry into how they get applied by the mind and make experience possible for it. That inquiry is concerned with the faculties and features that the mind possesses in virtue of being able to have experience of objects. Kant resolves that he will give a more direct argument in the new edition that will show that "no employment of pure reason can ever concern anything but objects of experience; and inasmuch as nothing empirical can be the condition in a priori principles, these cannot be anything more than principles of the possibility of experience generally. This alone is the true and adequate foundation of the determination of the boundary of pure reason." ${ }^{31}$ Kant recognizes that an analysis of the necessary presuppositions of certain cognitive tasks, such as forming judgments of objects of experience, is not the most direct or obvious way to argue for the limitation thesis. Proving that experience of empirical objects requires certain intellectual faculties does not show that no other cognition, or knowledge is possible. It only shows that that kind of experience has those requirements. As a result, "that the categories, which reason must make use of in all its cognition, can have no other employment whatever than that merely with reference to objects of experience (in such a way that in this experience the categories make possible merely the form of thought), then the answer to the question how they make such a form of thought possible is indeed important enough for completing this deduction, where possible; but with reference to the main purpose of the system, namely, the determination of the boundary of pure reason, the answer to how is in no way necessary but is merely meritorious." 32

Again we have confirmation that Kant sees his goal in both editions of the Critique of Pure Reason as determining the limits of the employment of reason, and in both cases he does so by showing that the categories are necessarily presupposed by experience of objects, and that any other application of the categories or other concepts outside the realm of space and time will be empty and will fail to produce knowledge. But in the A edition, Kant concedes that he has been diverted from his central task. He first devotes space to explaining how it is that the understanding applies its a priori concepts. Merely showing how they are employed in terms of
our faculties is distinct from showing that they are necessarily presupposed by experience of objects and that any other application is illegitimate. Kant believes that he has shown both in the A edition, but the explanation of the pre-cognitive processes that utilize a priori concepts has proven to be a distraction or stumbling block for his audience. He resolves in the B edition to shorten the treatment and focus on showing first and foremost that the categories cannot be employed legitimately to anything that cannot be an object of experience. Metaphysical knowledge of the non-empirical world is impossible.

We can see, then, that Kant's motive for altering the B edition is not that he changed his position with regard to the transcendental psychology of the Subjective Deduction. He wants to clarify the argument that knowledge is limited to the world of experience. He does not alter the Subjective Deduction because he has lost confidence in it, or because he does not think it is a worthy topic. He reduces its size and shifts its location in order to focus attention on the limitation thesis.

## 4. The Argument of the Subjective Deduction

In a theory of mental processing where the purpose is to determine only what is necessary to perform certain cognitive acts, Kant's aim is to keep the account as simple as possible, introducing only the faculties or functions that are required by the task without unnecessarily complicating the psychological scheme. Thus he avoids merely speculative descriptions of the mind that would be hypothetical, but not certain given the cognitive acts in question. Kant offers only the faculty distinctions which are warranted by the task at hand. Given that we have a multitude of disparate intuitions that will provide the basis on which the mind forms judgments of objects that persist over time, a faculty of combining, synthesizing, or binding will be necessary. In the A edition, Kant suggests that the imagination does the work in conjunction with the understanding. In the B edition, the understanding seems to be the primary faculty. We may ask why in both cases Kant separates the combining faculty from the already established faculty of intuition.

In the Transcendental Aesthetic, he claims that faculty of intuition is an essentially receptive and passive faculty whereby we are able to cognize objects. He argues that a necessary but not sufficient condition of the possibility of cognizing objects is a faculty of intuition which is sensible in human beings, and that gives content or matter to the form of concepts. ${ }^{33}$ Kant distinguishes the faculty of intuition from the understanding and imagination in terms of their roles in judgment. He sees judgment or
cognition as an essentially active encounter with objects where the mind conforms elements produced by its encounters with objects to the dictates of a conceptual scheme. He appreciates Hume's argument that the raw data of sensibility and reflection underdetermine our judgments of objects. We can find neither identity, continuity, nor causation in sensations alone. Therefore some form of mental activity to produce judgments is essential. Since the faculty whereby we acquire the data of thought passively receives, it is not suited to the task of actively combining intuitions. Kant believes that he is warranted in introducing another mental faculty, but the characterization of it will remain highly abstract.

Since the cognitive task we are analyzing, the ability to judge objects on the basis of sensible intuitions, is complicated, there is a great deal of cognitive labor that needs to be explained. Positing a few faculties and characterizing their functions only in the most general terms provides us with few insights into the so-called black box. In part, that is Kant's intention. He is not concerned with the contingent details of how a particular species of cognitive system such as the one found in human beings operates. Through a transcendental analysis, Kant can determine the framework requirements in terms of faculties and functions for any mind that makes judgments of objects. In this regard, functionalist readings of Kant's philosophy of mind as advanced by Kitcher, Brook, and Meerbote are on the right track. ${ }^{34}$

The first premises in the A edition draw on the arguments from the Transcendental Aesthetic. Intuitions are temporal, and in virtue of being temporal, they are manifold: Kant writes, "No matter from where our presentations arise, as modifications of the mind they belong to inner sense: they belong to inner sense whether they are produced through the influence of external things or through inner causes; and whether they have come about a priori, or empirically as appearances. . . . In time they must one and all be ordered, connected, and brought into relations. This is a general comment that must be presupposed throughout what follows. Every intuition contains a manifold. Yet this manifold would not be presented as such if the mind did not in the sequence of impressions following another distinguish time. For any presentation as contained in one instant can never be anything but absolute unity.," 35

Kant makes several important claims in this passage. He has argued in the Transcendental Aesthetic that when we introspect, inner sense reveals mental contents that are temporal but not spatial. Only the formal condition of time applies to both inner and outer sense. Introspection is the determination of the self and its states. When we ascertain, for instance, that we are sad, the sadness does not occupy a spatial location the way a sensation of brownness must be spatial. But sadness as well as outer
sensations must have some temporal location and duration. His first concern in the Subjective Deduction argument is to begin building upon only that which can be said of all sensations so that conclusions about the subject's abilities based upon them have a comparable universality. The spatiality of intuitions gets little mention in the argument that follows. But the temporality of intuitions plays a prominent role.

Another implication of the temporality of all intuitions, Kant says, is that we must order, connect, and relate our appearances in time. The fact that our intuitions occur serially imposes a special kind of cognitive labor on the mind. Forming judgments about them requires that they be organized temporally. Kant believes that he has shown in the Transcendental Aesthetic that the only sort of experience of objects that we can have is experience in which we judge objects to occupy some determinate region or duration of time. We grasp, locate, and judge them to be in temporal relation to each other and to ourselves.

The temporality of all intuitions is closely tied to their diversity or manifoldedness, Kant says. Since our intuitions are had over time, a theory of cognition would be insufficient if it only addressed what occurs in a single instant. Our sensory systems are subjected to a multitude of serial inputs. It is the manifold of presentations that the mind must incorporate into its judgments. In the most general terms, Kant is concerned to address how it is that a being can have experience that is unique and diverse from moment to moment and form judgments about that experience that casts it into a stable world filled with recurring, homogenous, and predictable objects.

The B edition contains more evidence of Kant's striving to build his analysis of mind on only the highest level of abstraction justified by his transcendental method. He manages to separate the temporality of intuitions from their manifoldedness and the need for combination, making it possible to widen the domain of his theory of mind to those cognitive systems that judge objects on the basis of non-temporal intuitions. The question of what can and cannot come to us through intuition plays a more basic role in the argument. Combination of the relevant sort, we learn, can only be produced by an act of the mind: "A manifold's combination (conjunctio) as such can never come to us through the senses; nor, therefore, can it already be part of what is contained in the pure form of sensible intuition. For this combination is an act of spontaneity by the power of presentation; and this power must be called understanding, in order to be distinguished from sensibility. Hence all combination is an act of understanding-whether or not we become conscious of such combination." 36

We can interpret this as an attempt to recast the argument without the dependence upon the temporality thesis and to give an argument for categoriality that is not dependent upon that particular character of human constitution. The temporality and spatiality of intuitions creates a disarray among appearances that must be rectified or ordered by the activity of the understanding. But the temporality and spatiality of intuitions is contingent. Kant makes this surprising comment about space and time as a priori forms of intuition, "All we know is the way in which we perceive them [objects]. That way is peculiar to us and does not necessarily have to apply to all beings, even though it applies necessarily to all human beings.," 37 If Kant's theory of mind and subsequently his argument for the categories are based upon the temporality and spatiality of intuitions, then it would appear that the deep transcendental structure of the mind, the theory of synthesis, and the categories are also contingently dependent upon human constitution. Kant does not want to accept such a subjectivized or relativized analysis of reason. There is a need for a more general claim about combination in judgment that does not focus on their spatial and temporal diversity.

Kant addresses that need with an argument that is not incompatible with the earlier edition, but which shifts and broadens the emphasis. Even though the spatiality and temporality of intuitions may be contingent, Kant's argument is that the unconnectedness of intuitions and the constructivist character of applying concepts in judgment are not. ${ }^{38}$ Kant's claim is not that it is not possible for combination to come through the senses. His point is that the manifold's combination, the combining of the different intuitions that goes into judgment, cannot come to the mind through sensibility. It does not matter what comes to the mind in intuition, if the mind is not capable in some fashion of taking that content and conforming it, or determining it according to its own conceptual structure by its own intellectual act, then that data can never be anything at the level of judgment to that mind. Sensations alone are inadequate, particularly when they are confined to a single moment or region of space. Sensation does not constitute experience of objects.

Kant stresses a more fundamental point in the $\mathrm{B}$ edition than in the A edition. At the heart of the theory of synthesis, there are several claims about the process by which a mind that accesses objects through intuition and comes to have mental states that represent such objects by means of those affections. Sensations are inadequate for object awareness by themselves, the mind must match or align the content it finds in its sensory encounters with the cognitive tools it possesses, and unless there can be this conformity between the two, cognition will not be possible.

The characterization of combination in the B edition can be employed to answer a standard objection to Kant's view of geometry. After the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries in the nineteenth century, Kant was widely criticized for arguing that space and time, which he conceived of in Euclidean terms, necessarily configure our knowledge. If we can have mathematical knowledge of non-Euclidean geometries, it would seem that Kant must be mistaken about the forms of our intuition being Euclidean. Kant's view would confine our knowledge of geometry to Euclidean geometry. The revised version of the argument for combination in the $\mathrm{B}$ edition establishes the need for combination of intuitions without a reference to their spatiality and temporality. In this more abstract version of his argument, Kant is not committed to the view that a subject must possess Euclidean forms of intuition. Kant argues that for any mind that accesses objects by way of a receptive faculty of intuition, the mind must perform combinatory work to recast those presentations according to its conceptual scheme. What is crucial to Kant's argument is that the mind in question must be affected by objects by way of intuition. The presentations stand in need of combination, but the mode of affection is not necessarily Euclidean.

Kant believes that there are a number of more specific tasks and faculties within the framework of intuition, imagination, and understanding that can be successfully demarcated by a transcendental analysis of the mind. To bridge the gap from intuition to judgment, Kant argues that three essentially different kinds of combination or synthesis must occur for cognition of objects to be possible. Since, for Kant, a distinction in the sort of mental task that is being performed warrants drawing a distinction between faculties, he argues that the pre-cognitive labor must be divided among faculties of synthesis for apprehension, reproduction, and recognition. We will deal with each in turn.

The discussion of space and time in the A edition and combination in the $\mathrm{B}$ edition has shown that we have presentations that are manifold. We experience objects that have diverse spatial and temporal features. We cannot apprehend all spaces and all times at once. We have to combine presentations from different spaces and times. Kant claims that in intuition the presentations are each absolute unities, and are disconnected from each other. Insofar as it is considered solely in an instant, a presentation is an undifferentiated whole to the mind. Distinguishing parts or discriminating features takes cognitive work, and Kant wishes to emphasize that the mind cannot grasp or recognize those features solely by its receptivity, or insofar as it is affected. An awareness of the object as an object of judgment cannot migrate in through the senses. It must be the product of the mind's construction. Connecting sensations into a
presentation of a unified object requires that they be gone through and gathered together by the faculty of imagination or understanding.

Kant calls this act the synthesis of apprehension. The challenge is to understand why and how Kant differentiates between the reception of sensations by intuition and the apprehension of them in synthesis. By saying that the intuitions constitutive of judgment must be apprehended, how is Kant making a claim that is substantially different than what he says about sensibility? In Kant's division of pre-cognitive labor, the difference in function warrants a difference in the faculty. To Kant, the receptivity of intuition warrants drawing a distinction between it and the active, or spontaneous faculty of the understanding. Furthermore, intuition only provides the matter of thought; the understanding will impose the organization. For the task of judgment to be accomplished, the faculty possessing concepts that will give them form must apprehend the data provided it by intuition. The understanding, not just sensibility, must take those intuitions as its own.

Since apprehension is serial and unified and judgment ranges over more presentations than what is contained in a single moment, Kant's next step is to postulate a capacity for reproduction of non-occurrent presentations for synthesis with other occurrent and non-occurrent presentations. But Kant's first step in this sub-argument takes an odd turn that muddles the line of the Subjective Deduction argument. He recalls a psychological phenomenon discovered by Hume, "There is a [natural] law whereby presentations that have often followed or accompanied one another will finally associate, and thereby enter into connection, with one another.,"39 Hume argues that, "In all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the mind which is not supported by any argument or process of the understanding.". ${ }^{40}$ To the extent that Hume means that there are aspects of our judgments of objects that cannot be traced to any inferential, reasoned, or sensory source, Kant agrees. In his solution to the judgment gap, Hume strives to be as parsimonious as possible in his postulation of psychological principles. Hume argues that the principle of association provides a full explanation. With causes and effects, when a person finds "similar objects or events to be constantly conjoined together. . . he immediately infers the existence of one object from the appearance of the other."."41 And "after the constant conjunction of two objects-heat and flame, for instance, weight and solidity-we are determined by custom alone to expect the one from the appearance of the other.". ${ }^{42}$

Kant's rejection of Hume's theory of association forms the foundation of the rest of Kant's theory of mind. Association cannot do the job assigned to it, says Kant, because at best it only allows us to draw
contingent, a posteriori connections. A theory of association does not allow us to explain how it is possible to form judgments that are about objective rather than merely subjective states. Unfortunately, Kant's critique of association is brief and obscure. He says that association, "presupposes, however, that appearances themselves are actually subject to such a rule, and that such accompanying or following actually takes place, in conformity with certain rules, in the manifold of the presentations of these appearances. For otherwise our empirical imagination would never get to do anything conforming to its ability, and hence would, like a defunct ability unknown even to ourselves, remain hidden in the mind's interior. ${ }^{43}$ The argument can be clarified with some points from the B edition. Kant agrees with Hume that we associate presentations that are constantly conjoined. After constant conjunction in experience, when one presentation occurs, it brings the other presentation to mind, whether the object is present or not. The operation of this law, however, presupposes the operation of another more fundamental nonempirical law that makes the association possible. At best, association would make it possible to make a claim about our subjective states, "When I support a body, then I feel a pressure of heaviness. I could not say: It, the body, is heavy-which amounts to saying that these two presentations are not merely together in perception (no matter how often repeated), but are combined in the object, i.e., combined independently of what the subject's state is." ${ }^{24}$ What is missing from the associationist account is how the mind was able to come to form thoughts of objects that could be associated. No matter how often they are felt, sensory stimuli themselves are merely subjective feels. They cannot inform the mind a posteriori about the distinction between the mind's subjective apprehension of objects and the independent, objective state of the things it experiences. That would require an awareness of the representation not merely as it is experienced but as a representation of some object that has its own states. No experience can inform the mind of this distinction because it is this distinction that makes experience of objects, conceived of as objects, possible. At most, association would connects sensory states in the order and arrangement that they are experienced. Kant concludes that judging objects necessarily presupposes that there must be some rule or rules that do more than merely associate.

The failure of the theory of association reveals two tasks which will require two faculties: the synthetic faculty of reproduction recalls or reproduces presentations that are no longer occurrent, making them representations, and the synthetic faculty of recognition in concepts will govern the reproduction in a fashion that enables us to make the subject and object distinction in judgment that mere empirical association does not.

Before turning to recognition and concepts, let us complete Kant's account of reproduction which contains an important insight about the role of memory in judgment. Kant says: "If I want to draw a line in thought, or to think the time from one noon to the next, or even just to present a certain number, then I must, first of all, necessarily apprehend in thought one of these manifold presentations after the other. But if I always lost from my thoughts the preceding presentations (the first parts of the line, the preceding parts of the time, or the sequentially presented units) and did not reproduce them as I proceeded to the following ones, then there could never arise a whole presentation; nor could there arise any of the mentioned thoughts-indeed, not even the purest and most basic presentations of space and time.,"45 Kant argues that memory plays a role in the precognitive work that makes consciousness of objects possible. Memory does not merely make it possible to remember objects previously experienced. It is a necessary for judging that there are objects. From moment to moment, sensations flee through consciousness with nothing intrinsic to connect them. First there is one feel, then another, and then yet another. If each one was examined only for what it is without drawing any broader connections, there would be no thread that ties them together. If one sensation sprung up in consciousness and then vanished as the next one took its place, with consciousness unable to retain, or represent that which has past, no synthesis of the disparate intuition states would be possible. If no synthesis of the disconnected temporal states were possible, then the mind could not become aware of objects as objects.

Hume had begun to see the same problem in his discussion of the identity and continuity of objects that are neither identical nor continuous in our sense impressions. According to Hume, with the imagination we feign an identity that is not there, smoothing over the transitions, interruptions, and discontinuities. But Kant's point is much stronger. If the mind is to grasp and judge that there are objects as unified, synthesized collections of its disparate intuitions, it must be able to bind the succession of intuitions together. In particular, it must be able to regenerate intuitions that are no longer occurrent in experience and bind them all together. Non-occurrent presentations cannot be regenerated unless the mind possesses some faculty of reproduction to represent that which has already transpired in receptivity. But like many of Kant's labels for mental faculties, the role of memory that we are most familiar with in our own lives is not the same as the role it plays in judgment. What must be remembered are not judgments or objects, they are the presentations from intuition that are constitutive of judgments of objects. The sort of memory that operates in reproduction is below the level of object awareness.

Some contemporary studies on brain dysfunction illustrate Kant's prescient point about the role of memory in experience of objects. Oliver Sacks, for instance, tells the stories of patients with a neurological disorder, severe cases of Korsakov's syndrome, that have retroactively destroyed their long term memory as well as their short term memory capacity. ${ }^{46}$ Many of the patients can recall in surprising detail what happened to them before a certain date. But for all the time since, they have possessed only a small window of recollection, in some cases as small as a few seconds. Jimmie, one of Sacks's patients, can remember quite clearly before 1945 , but he cannot remember a conversation he had 2 minutes ago. In the patients that can still function at all, they have learned strategies for dealing with the disability. They rely upon habits formed before the memory loss to perform common daily functions. But new situations, new environments, and new challenges fill the short-term memory person with anxiety and confusion. The more severe their loss of short and long-term memory functions, the less conscious of the world around them they are and the less able they are to function in it. Interestingly, Sacks notes that one of the tragic things about the Korsakov's patients is that they seem to be largely unaware of what they have lost. They find it difficult to understand explanations of the problem they suffer from, and they do not seem to be deeply disheartened by it. Their response fits well with Kant's claim that memory is one of the necessary threshold faculties for experience of objects. Not only are they close to slipping beneath the threshold, but they are lacking some of the cognitive abilities to grasp what the difference between the levels of awareness are.

Let us imagine the extreme case of a no-memory person, a person who does not have intact memories of a distant past, and who cannot remember anything beyond the momentary sensation currently being felt. For such a person, every moment is new, filled with surprise, and utterly without connection to the past. Kant's point is that such a person could not become aware of objects as objects. She could no sooner begin to form a thought about an occurrent sensation than it would vanish, being replaced by another sensation that is similar or different. Grasping that the occurrent sensation contains something that is similar, or different from the previous sensation would require that the person reach back into the past and recall the experience that was had, but no longer is occurrent, which ex hypothesi is impossible. The no-memory person would not be able to thread together a world of objects with any temporal duration from the ephemeral and unmemorable sensations of her experience. Her awareness would be confined to the present moment without any expectation about the future or memory of the past. Her world would have no objects.

Being able to draw on the past is necessary for judgment, but it is not sufficient, Kant argues. We must be able to recall non-occurrent intuitions in order to form thoughts about the objects they represent. But how they are reproduced, in what order, and how they are connected to other mental states is vitally important if judgment is to be possible. In his explanation of the Synthesis of Recognition in a Concept, we get the more complete account of what is required from the subject to forge intuitions into object awareness. Kant has established that multiple presentations need to be combined, and in his rejection of associationism he makes it clear that judgments of objects cannot be achieved by merely connecting the presentations in the order they occur. At best, associating our intuitions informs us of only our subjective states: we feel redness and heaviness, but it would not allow us to assert that there is a red, heavy body. Sensations alone cannot inform us that there is such a thing as a body with its own properties independent of the sensations. Strictly speaking, we would not even be able to attribute sensory experiences to ourselves such as that we are having a red, heavy sensation, because that too presupposes the ability to recognize objects and attribute properties to them. Associationism underdetermines the distinction between subjects and objects in judgment. Nevertheless, in order to have cognition of objects, the mind must reproduce its non-occurrent presentations. If the presentations are reproduced haphazardly, or without any determinate order or arrangement, the mind will not be able to grasp any unified object. There will be nothing but a random play of representations, associated only in the order in which they were experienced. Kant says, "But if presentations reproduced one another indiscriminately, just as they happen to come together, then there would again arise no determinate coherence of presentations and hence no cognition whatever, but merely an accumulation of them devoid of any rule. ${ }^{47}$ Let us suppose that a mind reproduces and combines red and heavy presentations in one moment, then red and lightweight, and then lightweight and painful presentations without any regularity or structure. We would not say that such experience was experience of objects at all, but just a booming, buzzing confusion, as William James put it.

The combination of presentations involved in judgment must occur according to some non-associative and non-random scheme. It is not possible to form judgments of objects that have no determinate, regular, or predictable behavior. Unless it is equipped with rules or laws for organizing the reproduction of its intuitions, a mind will not be able to conceive of objects at all. To connect presentations in some order that is not just their order of occurrence, a rule is needed to indicate which presentations out of the manifold should be connected and which should be ignored.

Some guidance for parsing presentations is needed to distinguish subject from object, and one object from another. Occurrent and non-occurrent presentations, including those that will be attributed to the subject, can be connected in an infinite variety of ways. Which nonoccurrent presentations, or which parts of occurrent and non-occurrent presentations get selected or reproduced by the imagination must depend upon the mind. Nothing in the presentations considered by themselves makes reference to any other presentations, or indicates which presentations should be combined or how they are combined. In what has come to be known as the binding problem, the heavy sensation, for example, considered by itself does not inform the mind whether it is the red thing that is heavy or the green thing, or even that there is an object distinct from the sensation. The rules that make the distinction between subjects and objects possible cannot come from the presentations themselves. They are rules for how the presentations are to be connected to be seen as subjects and objects. If the rules cannot be found in the a posteriori presentations, then those rules that make the combination of presentation possible must be a priori. Somehow the mind needs to be able to move beyond what is offered by the senses only, "presentations in themselves must not in the same way be regarded as objects (outside our power of presentation.)",48 In order to form cognitions about objects, not only do we have to organize them according to conceptual rules, but the mind must come to conceive of the representation of the object as a representation of an object that itself is distinct from the object. To cognitively grasp that there is an object, is to grasp that there is something it is to be that object, that it has a nature or character of its own. To grasp that it has its own nature or character is to assert that something is the case about it and, by implication, other things are not the case about that object.

Forming a judgment about the object requires that the mind conceive of its representation of the object as being of or about the object, and that our conception of it may or may not capture what is the case in the object. The argument for the need for concepts has been based upon the fact that intuitions themselves, singly or jointly, do not intrinsically represent or succeed in referring. To order presentations according to the rule of a concept is in effect to grasp that something is the case, that some presentations should be bound together and some should not. But such rule governed binding cannot occur without a conception of some objective state of affairs that makes the distinction between what is and what is not the case possible. To judge by means of concepts, according to Kant, is to make a claim about an objective state of affairs, rightly or wrongly, "Thus to say 'The body is heavy' is not merely to state that the
two representations have always been conjoined in my perception. . . what we are asserting is that they are combined in the object, no matter what the state of the subject may be.",49 A concept cannot be successfully and meaningfully applied unless it is possible for there to be some conditions under which the concept does not apply. A judgment cannot consistently or coherently be used to assert both that something is and is not the case, otherwise there is no rule like structure and the concept conveys nothing. It ceases to even be recognizable as a concept. To use a simple empirical example, the concept of being brown is without meaning or use unless it makes possible the separation of brown things from non-brown things. On Kant's view of concepts as rules, concepts cannot have meaning unless they make it possible to assert that something is the case. Asserting that something is the case is to conceive of an objective state of affairs that may or may not conform to that which the concept in a judgment is used to assert. The application of concepts in judgment presupposes a conception of objects that are distinct from the judgments that are made about them.

The fact that we are capable of judgments of objects demonstrates that we do conceive of objects as being independent of our sensations. The mystery is how we are able to do that, particularly since our sensations are inadequate to the task of allowing us to conceive of something separate from them. Kant acknowledges the inexplicability of this ability: "this object must be thought only as something as such $=x . " 50$ The " $x$ " is a sort of place holder in cognition. It is the template of a thing in general that allows the mind to move from merely having sensible intuitions to taking those intuitions as referring to, or indicating the state of something beyond the presentation itself. Since the template is necessary and a priori, Kant calls it a transcendental object. What we know about it is purely formal and based on the most abstract requirements of judging objects.

But Kant believes that more can be said about the transcendental template. The categories are the a priori concepts that constitute the object of experience. They enumerate the various lawlike features that an object must have to be experienced as an object. They enable a shift from a merely affected, feeling consciousness to an active consciousness that is capable of grasping that there are objects that are different from itself, the objects have their own states, and they are separate from its presentations. Since the categorial concepts, unlike any of the other concepts a mind possesses, make it possible for its presentations to refer to the objects, we can say from our sensing red that the object is red. As a rule, the concept of being red enables the mind to separate the red objects from the objects that are not red, but the categories make it possible that the mind can even grasp that there are such things as objects.

To the consternation of his commentators, Kant does not present an argument for the uniqueness of the categories, or say that the list is complete in this discussion. To the contrary, just as he said that the forms of intuition are arbitrarily space and time for us, he says, "But why our understanding has this peculiarity, that it a priori brings about unity of apperception only by means of the categories, and only by just this kind and number of them-for this no further reason can be given.".51 But the need for some transcendental template for object recognition is not contingent. Even if someone were to reject the uniqueness or completeness of Kant's table, the implication for Kant's list of transcendental faculties is that the mind must possess some a priori concepts that enable it to distinguish between subjects and objects that cannot be facilitated by ordinary, empirically derived concepts.

There is a parallel between Kant's view of the categories and categoriality in general and a point we made earlier concerning the spatial and temporality of intuition. In the light of the development of non-Euclidean geometries, it is a virtue of Kant's account that the need for combination is not dependent upon the Euclidean spatiality and temporality of intuitions. The completeness and uniqueness of Kant's Table of Categories has long been debated. With 19th and 20th century developments in logic, Kant's essentially Aristotelian logical scheme has become even more doubtful. The portion of the Subjective Deduction that we are now reconstructing resists these criticisms of the Table of Categories because Kant argues that categoriality, or the possession of some a priori concepts that form a transcendental object template, are necessary for judgment. The direct implication on the subjective side is that the mind of the subject must be in possession of this object template and have a faculty that is capable of applying it to intuitions. But Kant does not insist in the Subjective Deduction argument that only his list of categories will serve the function. He merely asserts that the Table of Categories is the set of concepts that we find ourselves employing. As he did with space and time, he seems to have left the possibility open that other beings might employ different categories. But the Subjective Deduction shows that an a priori conception of the object as a place holder in cognition cannot be dispensed with in the judgment of objects of experience, and neither can the faculty that applies it.

In the portion of the argument concerning the categories, Kant does not address the aim of the Subjective Deduction directly. He has been diverted to the Objective Deduction with an argument that the formal conditions for object representation must include the application of concepts, at least some of which are a priori. But the argument has implications on the subjective side of Kant's goals. There are several implications for the transcendental character of the judging mind. First,

Kant's argument so far has shown that there must be a faculty of concepts that provides the lawlike structure needed to cast sensations into object form. Following tradition, Kant calls this faculty the understanding: "We have earlier explicated the understanding in various ways: as a spontaneity of cognition (in contrast to the receptivity of sensibility); as a power to think; or as a power of concepts, or again of judgments. These explications, when inspected closely, all come to the same. We may now characterize the understanding as our power of rules." ${ }^{52}$ That our experience is spatial and temporal and subject to Kant's particular table of categories may be a contingent facts about human beings, but the necessity of a faculty of concepts for a mind that has sensible intuitions is not. Even though the particulars of object representations appear to be relativized to human beings for Kant, the more abstract requirements of threefold synthesis are not. Even though the reason we have just the categories that we do is a mystery to us, the Subjective Deduction shows that the faculties of the mind, not experience, must be the source of the object template that makes judgments of objects possible.

The Subjective Deduction is not an argument for the categories. Nor is it an argument for the limitation thesis. What Kant establishes objectively is that since experience of objects requires some non-associative concepts, and some of the concepts are necessarily presupposed in object representation, they are a priori. Kant shows categoriality without an argument for his table of categories. On the subjective side, he shows that a subject must do more than merely associate temporally and spatially contiguous presentations. A subject must combine according to rules and therefore must possess a faculty of concepts that is closely integrated with the other pre-cognitive faculties. Furthermore, since some of the concepts are categorial, the mental faculties of a subject must also be the source of the concepts that are constitutive of object experience. Kant says that the understanding provides both kinds of concepts. But the argument for the limitation thesis and the argument for categoriality in the Objective Deduction can be separated from Kant's theory of mind.

Kant does not give a separate designation to the faculty of pure, a priori concepts, but given their substantial differences from other a posteriori concepts, he may have been justified in doing so. The difference between receptivity and activity are adequate in Kant's mind to warrant a distinction between the faculties of intuition and understanding respectively. Why is it that Kant does not argue that the a priori concepts, which make it possible to cognize objects and have experience that results in empirical concepts, are different enough in function from empirical concepts to justify introducing a new object-making faculty of mind? The answer can be found in Kant's stressing of the fundamental similarity of
a priori and a posteriori concepts. The ordering and combining of representations is the essential purpose of both kinds of concepts. Dividing our experience according to the distinction between the subject and the object is a matter of ordering and combining the representations that the mind attributes to an object, and distinguishing them from the representations that it attributes to itself. In the case of empirical concepts we divide our experience into those representations that belong to the subject and those that belong to the object. A priori concepts make judgments of objects possible, empirical concepts capture the properties that objects possess. Kant would have been justified in calling a priori concepts something other than concepts, just as he insists that space and time are not concepts but forms of intuition. Perhaps the "transcendental object = $\mathrm{x}$ " description in the A edition reflects his awareness of this issue.

The Subjective Deduction also contains a refutation of Hume's notorious denial of proof for an identical, unified self. ${ }^{53}$ There can be no unified representation of the object unless all of the faculties and the mental contents on which the faculties operate are possessed by the same subject. Let us imagine that the faculties of intuition, apprehension, reproduction, recognition, imagination, understanding, and reason were each possessed by different beings. It would be impossible for them singly to form a unified representation of an object. Kant says: "All possible appearances belong, as presentations, to the entire possible self-consciousness. But from this self-consciousness, taken as a transcendental presentation, numerical identity is inseparable and is a priori certain. For nothing can enter cognition without doing so by means of this original apperception." 54 The transcendental ground of unity is necessarily presupposed in all judgments of empirical objects. Kant says that "empirical consciousness [of objects] is based a priori on pure apperception, i.e., on the thoroughgoing identity of oneself in all possible presentations."."55 However, Kant does not claim to have empirical knowledge or cognition of the unified, identical self, or claim that it is a substance. That there is a unified ground of the faculties that contributes to judgment is necessarily presupposed by our judgments. But the faculties or the self cannot be subjected to the very cognitive processes that they make possible. Recognizing spatial and temporal matter is the end product of the processes.

Experience of objects as Kant construes it entails that a subject who has a representation of a unified, whole object must be identical with the being who possesses: the original intuitions that are taken up and unified in the presentation of the object, the faculty of apprehension that acquires the intuitions for synthesis in judgment, the faculty of reproduction that
represents the intuitions for synthesis in judgment, the faculty of recognition that guides the reproduction of non-occurrent intuitions, and the faculty of concepts that governs the synthesis of reproduction and recognition.

One of the sources of confusion about the chapter on the transcendental deduction has been the various unities that play a role in cognition. The confusion is compounded by Kant's insistence on mingling the discussion of the various unities involved in ordinary experience with a discussion of what kind of cognitive access we can have to the transcendental unity of the self. Let us call the unified cognition of intuitions in an object judgment the synthetic unity of representation. This is the unity that Kant has in mind when he says, "When we have brought about synthetic unity of the manifold of intuition - this is when we say that we cognize the object." ${ }^{56}$ Transcendental apperception or sometimes the transcendental unity of apperception is the unified self that must necessarily possess the faculties and intuitions for cognition, as we saw above. As Kant puts it, "Now there can take place in us no cognitions, and no connection and unity of cognitions among one another, without that unity of consciousness which precedes all data of intuitions, and by reference to which all presentation of objects is alone possible. Now this pure, original, and immutable consciousness I shall call transcendental apperception." 57

We can see the extent of the agreement and the disagreement between Hume and Kant with regard to the self. Kant refutes Hume's argument that we cannot give a philosophical defense of the existence of a self. Kant agrees with Hume, however, that we cannot introspect a persisting, autonomous substance. The only sorts of objects with a determinable existence for us are the objects that can affect our faculty of sensibility and be subjected to the conditions of judgment in the understanding. The transcendental unity of apperception is not that sort of object. As Kant says, "I have no cognition of myself as I am but merely cognition of how I appear to myself. Hence consciousness of oneself is far from being a cognition of oneself.,"58 Introspection cannot reveal the transcendental ground of unity that makes experience of objects possible. Nevertheless, we have deduced the existence of this highest formal ground of the self in the arguments of the Subjective Deduction with a transcendental argument. It is necessarily presupposed by ordinary empirical cognition of objects.

The existence of the transcendental self is unique among the things we can direct our thoughts toward. The transcendental self cannot become an object of experience for us because it is a thing that makes objects of experience possible for us. The paradox is that to cognize it would be to subject it to its own pre-cognitive processes, or in effect make its existence
dependent upon its own existence. The impossibility of experiencing it as an ordinary object is not a contingent matter.

## 5. Conclusion

Kant's comments regarding the Subjective Deduction and his revisions in the $\mathrm{B}$ edition are not indicators that Kant lost confidence in the argument or that he changed his view about it on any philosophical grounds. His reasons involve clarifying and focusing on the larger aims of the Critique of Pure Reason and the limitation thesis. The arguments in the B edition also appear to be different because Kant broadens the range of cognitive systems that his analysis includes. The combination argument in the $\mathrm{B}$ edition is more general in that it addresses nontemporal intuitions, but it is no less psychological in its implications. As opposed to commentators such as Brook, Kitcher, and Meerbote, Kant did not see the Subjective Deduction as a crucial part of the central aim of the Critique of Pure Reason. Kant's principle task in the Critique of Pure Reason is to present an argument that constrains metaphysics by limiting the possibility of knowledge to the empirical realm. The notoriously difficult Transcendental Deduction, and more specifically the Objective Deduction, are essential to Kant's task of arguing for the objective validity or universal and necessary application of the categories to all objects of experience. In addition to the argument for the limitation thesis, but not essential to it, Kant offers a theory of mind that is built upon the requirements of making judgments of objects from experience in the Subjective Deduction. This argument can stand largely on its own and hence can be reduced in the $\mathrm{B}$ edition, not because Kant disavows it, but because it does not contribute directly to showing why it is that knowledge of the realm beyond empirical experience is impossible. Since Kant is concerned to reduce potential confusion for his readers, focus directly on the argument for the limitation thesis, and to streamline his argument for it, he chooses to reduce the presence of the Subjective Deduction in the B edition. But his confidence and interest in a transcendental account of the mind of a knowing subject never waned.

We have seen that there is a great deal in the argument that deserves attention. It has been suggested, especially by Brook, that contemporary cognitive science research might be able to take something from Kant. Separating the Subjective Deduction and reconstructing it as we have done here makes that possibility even more plausible. Echoing Kant's well-known plea about metaphysics, artificial intelligence researchers like Jon Doyle have complained, "Is it not a scandal that
such common notions as mind and thought enter so prominently in our understanding of the world, yet find so little definiteness in the sciences they underlie?" Doyle advances the need for a general study of all possible minds. "It may not be possible," he says, "to set out in advance a definite class containing all possible minds, just as biologists have had to abandon all definitions of "living things" and adopt an accommodating approach to newly discovered life forms."59 But Kant seeks to do just that with regard to minds that judge. His analysis of the cognitive labor that produces experience of objects has resulted in a set of highly abstract conclusions about the faculties and abilities that a mind that is capable of judging objects must have. It must have access to the objects through some receptive faculty of intuition. It must have faculties that apprehend the manifold of presentations acquired in intuition. For the purpose of forming judgments out of the presentations, it must be able to reproduce the presentations that are no longer occurrent. Memory of non-occurrent presentations play an essential role. Some faculty of concepts or rules must provide guidance for the structured combination of the presentations. The mind must be in possession of and capable of applying an object template that enables it to grasp the distinction between subjects and objects. The template, the categories in human beings, must be a priori. The various faculties and functions that are necessary for cognition must all be integrated into the same subject. The transcendental unity of apperception is Kant's label for this unified self.

We have also seen that the Subjective Deduction possesses a level of abstraction and generality that makes it immune to some of the standard objections to Kant's Euclidean presuppositions and his Table of Categories. The Subjective Deduction draws conclusions about a mind that accesses objects by way of a receptive faculty of intuition, whether its forms are Euclidean space and time or not, and it establishes the need for categoriality in judgment, whether it employs Kant's Table of Categories or not.

The failure of many interpreters of the Transcendental Deduction to appreciate its subjective side have arisen in part from a failure to properly locate the place and role of the Subjective Deduction within Kant's larger goals. The group of commentators who have been inspired to eradicate or condemn the Subjective Deduction by Kant's comments about it and his revisions in the B edition have been too hasty. Kant consistently praised and defended the Subjective Deduction. Understood in the proper light, the Subjective Deduction has a place in Kant's critical system that is narrowly circumscribed by his argument for the limitation thesis in the Critique of Pure Reason and
his critical analyses of Hume, as well as rational and empirical psychology. ${ }^{60}$

## Notes

1. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. and ed. Werner Pluhar (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1996), A xvi.
2. See Henry Allison, Kant's Transcendental Idealism (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1983), p. 133.
3. See Peter Strawson, The Bounds of Sense (London: Routledge, 1989), p. 12.
4. H.W. Cassirer, Kant's First Critique (London: George Allen and Unwin, Ltd., 1954), p. 64.
5. See Andrew Brook, Kant and the Mind (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1994). See Patricia Kitcher, Kant's Transcendental Psychology (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990). See Ralf Meerbote, "A Sometimes Neglected Aspect of Kant's Subjective Deduction," Proceedings: Sixth International Kant Congress, (Washington, D.C.: University Press of America, 1989), pp. 259-270. Also see Norman Kemp Smith, Commentary to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press International, 1992).
6. See Brook, op. cit., p. 159
7. Kitcher, op. cit., p. 90.
8. See Kant, op. cit., A xvi.
9. Immanuel Kant, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. in Philosophy of Material Nature, trans. James Ellington, (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1985), Ak. 475, n. 8. See also Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B 119.
10. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B 146.
11. Kant, op. cit., B 147-148. See also Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, trans. James Ellington. (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1985), Ak. 297.
12. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A xvi.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid.
15. Kemp Smith, op. cit., p. 236.
16. Kant, op. cit., A xvi-vii.
17. Kemp Smith, op. cit., p. 48.
18. Kant, op. cit., A xvi-vii.
19. See ibid., A xvii.
20. Ibid., A 93, B 126.
21. Ibid., B 145.
22. See ibid., A 93, A 129-130, B 166.
23. Kant, op. cit., B 119. Kant, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. in Philosophy of Material Nature, trans. James Ellington. (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1985), Ak. 475, n 8.
24. See Ralf Meerbote, "A Sometimes Neglected Aspect of Kant's Subjective Deduction", Proceedings: Sixth International Kant Congress. (Washington, D.C.: University Press of America, 1985), p. 267.
25. See Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, $A k .265$.
26. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A ix.
27. Kant, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, $A k .471$.
28. See Anne Treisman, "Features and Objects in Visual Processing," Scientific American 255 (1986): 114-125.
29. Kant, op. cit., Ak 475 , n 8.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid.
33. See Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A 19.
34. See Kitcher, op. cit. See Brook, op cit. See Meerbote, op cit. See also Matt McCormick, "Questions about Functionalism in Kant's Philosophy of Mind: Lessons for Cognitive Science," Journal of Experimental and Theoretic Artificial Intelligence 15 (2003).
35. Kant, op. cit., A 99.
36. Ibid., B 130.
37. Ibid., A 42.
38. See ibid., B 130.
39. Ibid., A 100 . See also B 140, B 142 , \& B 152.
40. David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), p. 41.
41. Ibid., p. 42.
42. Ibid., p. 43.
43. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A 100.
44. Ibid., B 142.
45. Ibid., A 102.
46. See Oliver Sacks, The Man Who Mistook his Wife for a Hat (New York: Touchstone, 1998), ch. 2.
47. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A 121.
48. Ibid., A 104.
49. Ibid., B 142.
50. Ibid.
51. Ibid., B $145-146$.
52. Ibid., A 126.
53. See Kitcher, op. cit., pp. 91-116.
54. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A 113.
55. Ibid., A 116.
56. Ibid., A 105.
57. Ibid., A 107.
58. Ibid., B 158.
59. Jon Doyle, "The Foundations of Psychology: A Logico-Computational Inquiry into the Concept of Mind," in Philosophy and AI, eds. Robert Cummins and John Pollock, (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press, 1991), pp. 39-41.
60. I owe several people gratitude for their input on this article, including Ralf Meerbote, Lewis White Beck, and Rebekah Donaldson in particular.

[^0]:    *This article is one of two winners of the 2002 Rockefeller Prize awarded by the American Philosophical Association.

