# Iris Murdoch's Notion of a Loving Gaze 

NANCY E. SNOW<br>Department of Philosophy, Marquette University, P.O. Box 1881, Milwaukee, WI<br>53201-1881, USA; e-mail: Nancy.Snow@marquette.edu

## 1. Types of Gazes

In a famous passage, Iris Murdoch writes:

A mother, whom I shall call $\mathbf{M}$, feels hostility to her daughter-inlaw, whom I shall call D. M finds D quite a good-hearted girl, but while not exactly common yet certainly unpolished and lacking in dignity and refinement. $\mathrm{D}$ is inclined to be pert and familiar, insufficiently ceremonious, brusque, sometimes positively rude, always tiresomely juvenile. M does not like D's accent or the way D dresses. $\mathrm{M}$ feels that her son has married beneath him. Let us assume for the purposes of the example that the mother, who is a very "correct" person, behaves beautifully to the girl throughout, not allowing her real opinion to appear in any way. We might underline this aspect of the example by supposing that the young couple have emigrated or that $\mathrm{D}$ is now dead: the point being to ensure that whatever is in question as happening happens entirely in M's mind.

Thus much for M's first thoughts about $\mathrm{D}$. Time passes, and it could be that $M$ settles down with a hardened sense of grievance and a fixed picture of $\mathrm{D}$, imprisoned (if I may use a questionbegging word) by the cliché: my poor son has married a silly vulgar girl. However, the $\mathrm{M}$ of the example is an intelligent well-intentioned person, capable of self-criticism, capable of giving careful and just attention to an object, which confronts her. M tells herself: "I am old-fashioned and conventional. I may be prejudiced and narrow-minded. I may be snobbish. I am certainly jealous. Let me look again."1

With this example Murdoch highlights the distinction between two ways of perceiving the world. One way, exemplified by the notion of a hostile
gaze, offers a conception of perceiving the world through the falsifying veil of personal distortions. The initial impressions of the mother toward the daughter-in-law express this gaze. She selects as salient the daughterin-law's flaws while ignoring or downplaying her positive qualities. On Murdoch's view, the mother's perceptions of her daughter-in-law as rude, vulgar, and tiresomely juvenile are explicable by reference to the mother's own flaws, as she comes to recognize. With a hostile gaze the mother sees her daughter-in-law not as she really is, but through the distorting lens of her own weaknesses, conventionality, narrow-mindedness, prejudices, and jealousy.

By contrast, having a loving gaze allows the mother to see her daughter-in-law in more positive terms, as refreshingly simple, unencumbered by convention, delightfully direct. A loving gaze is elucidated by an insight common to some recent writers on virtue. John McDowell, Philippa Foot, and Rosalind Hursthouse agree that there is an internal perspective to virtue. ${ }^{2}$ To have a virtue is to have a distinctive perspective on the world. A benevolent or just person sees the world in a certain way. Understood in these terms, a loving gaze is a perspective made possible by the mother's virtue. If she has a loving gaze toward her daughter-in-law, this is prima facie evidence that she has become, at least relative to her daughter-in-law, a loving person.

Let us suppose that the mother has become a loving person relative to her daughter-in-law. A loving gaze made possible by the mother's virtue can be interpreted in several ways depending on its openness to various conceptions of personality. A loving gaze could require the mother to acknowledge, but ignore, her daughter-in-law's flaws. The flaw in this interpretation is that it would force her to focus exclusively on her daughter-in-law's virtues and talents, and to disregard her as a complete person. The loving gaze could require the mother to recognize that her daughter-in-law is flawed only in relation to her hostility and shortcomings. The daughter-in-law is not really flawed, but is a victim of the mother's projections. A problem with this interpretation is that it does not allow us to acknowledge the existence of genuinely evil people. Hitler's flaws were not the result of anyone else's psychological projections. Similarly, the faults of the daughter-in-law might also be real independently of the mother's psychological problems. A loving gaze could require the mother to acknowledge her daughter-in-law's flaws as facts that are outweighed by her virtues. The mother would view her daughter-in-law as a complete person but charitably, insofar as she recognizes that her virtues overcome her flaws overall. A loving gaze could require the mother to view her daughter-in-law's flaws and virtues to be intertwined. On this perspective, goodness and badness are
inseparable components of moral personality. Perhaps her daughterin-law's flaws are necessary for her virtues. As la Rochefoucauld remarks, "Vices have a place in the composition of virtues just as poisons in that of medicines: prudence blends and tempers them, utilizing them against the ills of life." ${ }^{3}$ A loving gaze could require the mother to view her daughterin-law as a changing person, instead of a static combination of flaws and virtues. The mother should view her daughter-in-law in terms of her highest, but as yet unrealized potential. This allows the mother to judge her positively, even if she is on balance presently more flawed than virtuous. The drawback of this way of viewing the daughter-in-law is that it requires the mother to consider what her daughter's unrealized talents might be and perhaps invites the mother to hold her daughter-in-law to an unreasonable standard.

We may ask what allows the mother to make the transition from being ill-disposed to her daughter-in-law and viewing her with a hostile gaze to being loving. Murdoch claims that the mother is capable of giving "just and careful attention to an object, which confronts her." 4 Christine Swanton analyzes this notion of attention in terms of the idea of receptivity or engrossment as a heightened awareness discussed by Nel Noddings, an intuitive openness which involves feeling rather than thinking, and a quietness which reduces distracting background noise or racket. ${ }^{5}$ According to Swanton, the awareness, openness, and quietness involved in receptivity or engrossment make a loving gaze possible. The emotional attitude of a loving gaze allows for the positive features of the daughterin-law to emerge as salient for her mother and for the negative features of the daughter-in-law to be overlooked or disregarded.

A step is missing from both the analyses of Murdoch and Swanton. The missing step would chart the mother's emotional odyssey from a hostile to a loving gaze. Murdoch claims that the mother is capable of careful and just attention toward an object which confronts her. We might think the object is the daughter-in-law or the daughter-in-law in relation to the mother. A case can be made, however, that to make the transition from a hostile to a loving gaze, the focus of the mother's attention should be herself, or more specifically, herself in relation to her daughter-in-law. As Murdoch and Swanton indicate, the mother would have to recognize certain unpleasant facts about herself in order to make the transition. ${ }^{6}$ She would have to acknowledge her narrowness, conventionality, jealousy, and perhaps other negative qualities, such as pettiness and mean-spiritedness. But purely cognitive recognition of these flaws seems insufficient to move the mother toward a loving gaze. An emotional transition is also needed.

We can describe the emotional changes needed to move from a hostile to a loving gaze by using language employed in philosophical thinking about forgiveness. In moving to the loving perspective, the mother, though not exactly forgiving her daughter-in-law, takes an attitude toward her that is similar to that found in forgiveness. In cognitiveperceptual terms, the mother has stopped viewing her as a cause of offense. In emotional terms, she has stopped holding a grudge against her for marrying her son and, perhaps in the mother's mind only, displacing her in his life. The kind of emotional transition that is made in ceasing to hold a grudge has been described in analyses of forgiveness by such phrases as forswearing resentment, and changing one's heart.'. The mother needs to do something like this in order to acquire a loving attitude toward her daughter-in-law. The mother needs to eliminate her negative emotions before she can be sufficiently open to give the kind of attention needed to acquire an unbiased outlook and attitude toward her daughter-in-law.

Murdoch has it that the mother's self-scrutiny occurs some years after she feels negative emotions toward her daughter-in-law. Furthermore, the daughter-in-law, having either emigrated or died, is no longer part of the mother's daily life. She no longer functions as a more or less steady offense-giving irritant. The fact that they have come to be separated suggests that the mother's negative emotions need to subside or be put into abeyance before she can give serious and unbiased attention to herself in relation to her daughter-in-law. Murdoch's example suggests that a certain distance or detached perspective allows this kind of attention to become available to the mother. A similar distancing occurs in psychological counseling sessions, where a person can look at herself in a detached manner with the aim of gaining intellectual and emotional insight into the self. When the mother moves to a loving gaze in the example, she is looking back on the emotions she felt when actually confronted with her daughter-in-law. Looking back on the emotions allows her to separate herself as she was then from herself as she is now. Perhaps she sees herself as a wiser, calmer woman. Perhaps she no longer views her daughter-in-law as an emotional threat. Whatever explanation is given, it seems that the negative emotions the mother once felt must subside before she is capable of the kind of attention needed to acquire a loving gaze.

This kind of emotional elimination and subsequent unbiased attention toward the daughter-in-law need not commit the mother to having a projection conception of her daughter-in-law's flaws. She could recognize that her negative conception of he daughter-in-law is the result of her own psychological problems, yet resist the implication that her daughter-
in-law's actual flaws are the result of those psychological projections. The daughter-in-law might be flawed independently of the mother's psychology, and the mother could come to recognize this. Practical wisdom likely comes into play in enabling the mother to distinguish cases in which her evaluation of another person is due to her own shortcomings and emotional distortions and cases in which her evaluation accurately reflects the other person's failings.

More can be said about Murdoch's example. In her analysis, Swanton pointedly asks: "Can (loving) attention be distorting, and inaccurate to the facts?" 8 She also asks, "why should the loving gaze's account of 'unpolished' as 'refreshingly simple' be privileged over the hostile gaze's account of 'unpolished' as 'vulgar'??' Swanton's answer is that a loving gaze entails a kind of practical wisdom. Attention goes beyond pre-analytic receptivity or engrossment to involve analysis. First, self-knowledge at a fairly deep level is required if the mother is to correct the falsifying distortions she has of her daughter-in-law. ${ }^{10}$ Gaining the self-knowledge requires that the mother critically reflect on her own flaws in relation to her daughter-in-law. Furthermore, Swanton argues that the pre-analytic intuitive mode of receptivity gives way to analysis when appreciation enters the picture. ${ }^{11}$ She describes the analytic phase of appreciation by quoting Hume on a standard of taste: "It is natural for us to seek a Standard of Taste, a rule, by which the various sentiments of men may be reconciled: at least, a decision, afforded, confirming one sentiment, and condemning another." 12

Invoking Hume's standard of taste muddies the analysis. First, if Hume's account of appreciation were a correct description of the mother's reflective process, she would be preferring the sentiment of love to the sentiments of resentment, and hostility, on the basis of some independent standard or criterion. The standard or criterion could be moral or aesthetic. The mother could say to herself that it is morally unworthy to have such negative sentiments and that she should work to have a more loving attitude toward her daughter-in-law. Alternatively, she could effect her emotional transition on the basis of an aesthetic standard, saying to herself that it is simply unseemly to seethe in resentment and jealousy, and far more pleasant or appealing to have a positive outlook. Whether moral or aesthetic, the actual content of the standard is undisclosed. Qualms about the elusive content of the standard aside, this does not seem to be what the mother is doing. She does not assess sentiments, at least not directly. She does not compare one sentiment to another sentiment on the basis of some standard, and prefer the one to the other. The shift of the mother from a hostile to a loving gaze seems to be a change of heart and mind that proceeds internally on the
basis of careful soul-searching without overt reference to independent standards. The mother evaluates herself in relation to her daughter-in-law and, though this involves an assessment of the mother's sentiments, the form of the assessment does not proceed in the way implied by Hume's remark. What seems to be happening is not a comparative evaluation of sentiments based on an independent standard as much as a progression from one set of sentiments to another based on open and critical scrutiny of a self in relation to another self. Even if we agree for the sake of argument that Hume's standard of taste or something like it is implicitly operative in the deliberations of the mother, the standard is ambiguous between moral and aesthetic evaluations. Invoking the standard seems to suggest that the mother's changed evaluation of her daughter-in-law amounts to no more than an endorsement of her daughter-in-law's personal style. But Murdoch clearly wants to suggest that the mother is making a moral transition, and Swanton clearly tries to capture this dimension of Murdoch's example in her analysis. Appreciation of the daughter-in-law seems to be involved, but Hume's standard of taste does not accurately express what is at stake.

A more serious criticism of the use of Hume's standard in an analysis of appreciation that is meant to explicate how practical wisdom enters into attention is that it does not help us to answer Swanton's questions. It does not give us a reason why a loving gaze should be privileged over a hostile gaze. It gives us reason to say that a loving gaze has been favored over a hostile gaze insofar as it would have us say that the mother has decided to favor love over hostility and, as a consequence, appreciates her daughter-in-law, where before, such appreciation was lacking. But it does not give us reason to say why this decision should have been made. Furthermore, the analysis does not give us reason to say whether a loving gaze is accurate or inaccurate with respect to the facts.

We might address these issues by noting that the progress of the mother from a hostile to a loving gaze does make use of a standard, though not Hume's. The mother, it might be claimed, evaluates herself in relation to her daughter-in-law against the background of a body of social knowledge consisting of social roles, relationships, and associated expectations. The knowledge is factual and evaluative, and includes social norms and standards governing appropriate attitudes and behavior of mothers-in-law towards daughters-in-law. Though the mother might find it difficult to articulate, she implicitly uses a standard derived from this body of social knowledge. Using this standard to judge her own attitudes, she would note that hostility and resentment on the part of mothersin-law toward daughters-in-law are not generally regarded as morally worthy or admirable in her society. Her progress of sentiments, it might
be claimed, is informed by a comparison of attitudes that are evaluated using standards derived from social knowledge.

Using Murdoch's example as a benchmark, we can make this analysis more precise. The mother and daughter-in-law are likely to be in-laws in twentieth century England. Their temporal and cultural context shape their relations, behavior, and attitudes. The mother's conception of appropriate attitudes and behavior for herself and for her daughter-in-law are shaped by the social norms and expectations associated with the roles of mother-in-law and daughter-in-law in twentieth century England. The options available to the mother are fixed relative to the social knowledge and cultural norms of her time and place. To use terms familiar from Alasdair MacIntyre's analysis in After Virtue, the stories of who they are, are situated within the context of broader social practices and traditions. ${ }^{13}$ The mother's knowledge of how mothers-in-law and daughtersin-law should function and view each other is formed against the background of such ongoing practices and traditions. The standards pertaining to the virtues of mothers-in-law, qualities of character, attitudes, and behavior implicitly part of the mother's self-scrutiny are parts of such practices and traditions. Her choice, as Murdoch's example describes it, is whether to embrace such practices fully and wholeheartedly as normative for her revised evaluation and attitudes toward her daughter-in-law or to continue, as she did in the past, to observe them purely as a matter of external, social form.

## 2. Evaluating Interpretations of a Loving Gaze

If the choice of the mother is to move toward some version of a loving gaze or to remain hardened in hostility, we need to adjudicate between possible interpretations of a loving gaze. We may ask why we should prefer a loving gaze to a hostile gaze and whether a loving gaze is accurate or inaccurate with respect to the facts. A loving gaze is preferable because it would have us base evaluations of persons on facts about them, rather than on the distorted projections of evaluators. The value of a loving gaze relies in large part on its accuracy with respect to the facts. Degree and kind of factual accuracy thus give us a guide for evaluating competing construals of a loving gaze and what a loving gaze requires.

Using this standard, we can discern reason to reject the interpretations that a loving gaze requires that the flaws of the daughter-in-law be ignored and that she be disregarded as a complete person and that a loving gaze requires her flaws to be regarded not as real features of herself, but as the psychological projections of another person. Since
neither interpretation takes a realistic view of the facts about the daughter-in-law, neither satisfies the criterion that the preferred interpretation of a loving gaze be factually accurate. Moreover, if we tried to follow either version of a loving gaze in real life, our relations with people whose flaws we ignore, distort, or invent would become strained and unhealthy. We could put ourselves at the mercy of truly evil people. For the sake of accuracy as well as for healthy relationships, the two interpretations are best avoided.

The interpretation that a loving gaze requires us to acknowledge the flaws of the daughter-in-law to be outweighed by virtues fares little better. For one thing, it places a heavy burden on the mother to judge her daughter-in-law's virtues and flaws. The mother would have to know her daughter-in-law well to arrive at an accurate judgment of whether her virtues outweigh her flaws, and then would be entitled to adopt a charitable perspective only if her virtues in fact outweigh her flaws. It is not clear how the mother is supposed to assess this. Let us suppose that her daughter-in-law sees her virtues and flaws differently from the mother. We may ask if the mother should be at liberty to foist her evaluations off on her daughter-in-law. A deeper issue is the concern that virtues and flaws do not have simple additive value within personalities. Let us suppose that the daughter-in-law has many minor virtues, such as charm and tact, but one major flaw, such as cowardice. It is not clear if the one major flaw should disqualify the mother from taking a loving perspective toward her or if her minor virtues have sufficient additive value to outweigh her major flaw. A simple additive conception of virtues and flaws seems too simplistic to accurately capture the complexities at issue in personality evaluation, and the standard of evaluation to be used in the process of weighing is elusive. We have adequate reason to reject this interpretation of what a loving gaze requires.

The interpretation that a loving gaze could require the mother to view her daughter-in-law as a changing person has the advantage of requiring that the mother view her as a personality changing from a complex of dynamic forces. But if the mother's loving gaze is based on the as yet unrealized potential of her daughter-in-law and is forced to ignore her current flaws, it is inaccurate with respect to her present self. Let us suppose, however, that the mother acknowledges her daughter-in-law's current flaws but judges her favorably based on the promissory note of her potential. This would force the mother to consider what her daughterin-law's idealized possibilities are, and would invite the mother to hold her to what could be, for the daughter-in-law, an unrealistic standard.

The interpretation that a loving gaze could require the mother to view her daughter-in-law's faults and virtues to be intertwined has the
advantage of requiring that the mother take a realistic view of human personality that is true to our experience of ourselves in a deep and interesting sense. We are complex mixtures of good and bad qualities which are frequently inseparable. Depending on the context, our strengths are often our weaknesses and our weaknesses can be our strengths. Furthermore, as the maxim of la Rochefoucauld suggests, perhaps some flaws are necessary for some virtues. The complexity of virtues does not preclude the possibility of their being made up of qualities that can be bad as well as good. Contributing to a person's courage could be stubbornness, a flaw in many contexts. Alternatively, a person's courage could be partly a function of her unwillingness or inability to give due credit to opponents. An admixture of traits and tendencies contributes to a person's courage, giving it a unique quality as part of her distinctive character. Her courage is her courage because it incorporates other traits that she possesses. To be even more realistic and truer to the facts about personality, a loving gaze so construed should require the mother to acknowledge that human characteristics are not fixed and static, but flexible and dynamic. Their shape and quality depend on the history of the person who has them and how they interact with other traits within the individual's psychological economy. Flaws and virtues are often flexible enough to be shaped to suit specific contexts, and they can be changed in response to our changing life circumstances and selfconceptions.

We may ask how would a loving gaze, interpreted as openness to personality conceived of as a complex intermixture of flexible, dynamic traits and tendencies, function in the mother's revised evaluation of her daughter-in-law. A loving gaze would allow the mother to see her daughter-in-law's whole personality for what it is, a complex constellation of good and bad qualities. It would allow the mother to recognize the flaws for what they are, bona fide characteristics of her daughterin-law, instead of prejudiced distortions projected by the mother. The mother could, with the use of practical wisdom and knowledge of her daughter-in-law, distinguish between flaws that are necessary for her virtues and flaws that are not. Yet the mother would acknowledge that the overall personality of her daughter-in-law is a complex mix of qualities, none of which could be removed or altered without changing her. A loving gaze interpreted in this way provides the mother with a framework within which she could develop a nuanced perspective on her daughter-in-law, while recognizing that personalities change with time and circumstance.

Let us suppose that, using this framework, the mother evaluates her daughter-in-law as overall good. The mother is then saying that the
present mix of her daughter-in-law's qualities, good and bad, is an overall good blend that helps the daughter-in-law function as a person and is valuable to those around her. Her evaluation is sensitive to the specifics of the daughter-in-law. Perhaps given her circumstances, background, or aspects of her daughter-in-law's personality, her flaws help her to function in her social context and are valuable aspects of her personality. The standard of evaluation with respect to the daughter-in-law's flaws and virtues is sensitive to her situation and is applied using practical wisdom or prudence. What is not implied is an additive view that requires the mother to acknowledge the daughter-in-law's flaws as facts that are outweighed by her virtues. The mother cannot arrive at an accurate and fair judgment of her daughter-in-law by judging her good and bad characteristics according to a standard that is independent of the daughter-in-law's circumstances. Furthermore, the mother would recognize that her evaluation of the daughter-in-law is valid only for her present personality. Personalities change, for better or worse. Perhaps the daughter-in-law's good qualities are unstable and will, with time and under pressure, give way to her faults. Perhaps the circumstances that elicit the daughter-in-law's flaws will change, with the result that her faults will subside and positive qualities will emerge. Perhaps the daughter-in-law will do some soul-searching, and work on personality change. The mother's present evaluation need not be based on speculations about the daughter-in-law's future self.

Alternatively, let us suppose that the mother judges the daughter-inlaw as overall bad. This option, too, is open to the mother given a loving gaze that requires her to view her daughter-in-law's flaws and virtues as intertwined. The mother need not ignore her daughter-in-law's negativities, nor overlook them in favor of a judgment based on speculation about her idealized potential. The mother could simply note that her daughter-in-law's overall blend of traits is bad or unhealthy, while acknowledging her good qualities. She could do this sympathetically, paying prudential attention to the circumstances and forces that make her daughter-in-law what she is, and with regret, since her daughter-in-law is, after all, an important figure in her life. The mother is not forced into the unpalatable position of ignoring, denying, or mistakenly affirming another's badness. The mother can also recognize that her daughterin-law's personality could change and note with optimism that, with appropriate guidance, such change could be for the better.

None of the mother's evaluations, positive or negative, need coincide with her daughter-in-law's own judgments. Perhaps the daughter-in-law is self-critical and prone to ignore her assets, focusing too much on her weaknesses without giving due diligence to her strengths. Perhaps the
case is the opposite, and the daughter-in-law is disposed to be inattentive to her flaws while overstating her virtues. Perhaps she is not selfreflective at all, preferring the unexamined life to the possible perils of self-scrutiny.

## 3. Conclusion

Several interpretations of Murdoch's notion of a loving gaze are possible. The best of these, a loving gaze that would have us acknowledge that flaws and virtues are intertwined, dynamic features of personality, has advantages over a hostile gaze and competing versions of a loving gaze. Unlike a hostile gaze, which would have us base personality evaluations on projected prejudice and distortion, a loving gaze so interpreted would have us base personality evaluations on positive and negative facts about persons. It is preferable to other construals of a loving gaze because it allows us to take a nuanced view of human personality as a mix or blend of positive and negative qualities. It allows us to recognize that negative qualities may indeed have contributing roles to play in supporting positive qualities, as well as other functions within personalities as wholes. Such evaluations are sensitive to the circumstances of people. They are for the present only, and need not depend on guesswork about what the future holds. Judgments can be positive or negative, as required by facts about the personality of a person. A loving gaze so interpreted requires us to use practical wisdom to discern and evaluate personalities and is made possible by giving undistorted attention to persons. In addition to sensitivity to the multifaceted interplay of forces within personality, it also would have us take into account the complexity of the external forces that shape personality. Thus it offers a truer and more accurate perspective on persons than the other interpretations afford. It is a perspective worth having and cultivating. ${ }^{14}$

## Notes

1. Iris Murdoch, The Sovereignty of Good (London: Routledge \& Kegan Paul, 1970), pp. 17-18. Also see Christine Swanton, Virtue Ethics: A Pluralistic View (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), p. 111.
2. See John McDowell, "Virtue and Reason," The Monist 62 (1979). Also see Philippa Foot, "Utilitarianism and the Virtues," in Consequentialism and Its Critics, ed., Samuel Scheffler (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988), and Natural Goodness (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), and Rosalind Hursthouse, On Virtue Ethics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), pp. 178ff.
3. Francois, duc de la Rochefoucauld, Maxims, trans. Leonard Tancock (London, England: Penguin Books, 1959), p. 178.
4. Murdoch, op. cit., p. 17.
5. See Swanton, op. cit., pp.111-112.
6. See Murdoch, op. cit., p. 17; Swanton, op. cit., pp. 112-113.
7. See Jeffrie G. Murphy, "Forgiveness and Resentment," Midwest Studies in Philosophy 7 (1982), and Cheshire Calhoun, "Changing One's Heart," Ethics 103 (1) (1992).
8. Swanton, op. cit., p. 111.
9. Ibid., p. 112.
10. See ibid., pp. 112-113.
11. See ibid., p. 114 .
12. David Hume, "The Standard of Taste," in Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals, ed., L. A. Selby-Bigge, 3rd ed. revised P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975), p. 229. Also see Swanton, op. cit., p. 114.
13. See Alasdair MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory (Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press, 1981), pp. 190-209.
14. I am grateful to Keith Bauer, Kevin Gibson, Michael Monahan, and especially to an anonymous reviewer of the Journal of Value Inquiry for helpful comments on earlier versions of this essay.
