
## Triassic Conodonts And Their Role In Stage Boundary Definition Michael J. Orchard

Geological Survey of Canada, 625 Robson St., Vancouver, British Columbia V6B 5J3 Canada (e-mail: morchard@nrcan.gc.ca)
Abstract: Conodonts have played an important role in the construction of a Triassic timescale.

Each of the stage boundaries is reviewed in the context of their evolving conodont faunas. The base Triassic (Induan) is defined by the appearance of Hindeodus parvus, which developed from H. praeparvus; a parallel zonation is provided by Neogondolella species. For the Induan– Olenekian boundary, the appearance of Neospathodus waageni sensu lato within a plexus of similar species is favoured as the defining datum; Borinella and Eurygnathodus also appear about this time. The base of the Middle Triassic Anisian stage lies close to the appearance of Chiosella, with Triassospathodus and Spathicuspus characterizing the late Olenekian, and Gladigondolella tethydis and Nicoraella confined to the Anisian. Proxies for the Anisian–Ladinian boundary, which is defined by an ammonoid, are the first Budurovignathus species. The basal Carnian, also defined by an ammonoid, lies close to the first metapolygnathids, including M. polygnathiformis and M. tadpole. The Carnian–Norian boundary interval is characterized by many new taxa in Canada, but only a few species are common to Tethys, notably Metapolygnathus ex gr. M. echinatus. The Norian–Rhaetian boundary is likely to be based on evolution in Misikella in Tethys, with concurrent changes recognized in North American Epigondolella.

Conodonts arrived late on the stage of early Mesozoic timescale definition, yet they have become increasingly important in helping to define the Global Stratotype Section and Points (GGSP) of Triassic stages. In just 40 years of modern study, these microfossils have been used to define one GSSP (base Induan), feature in two others that are defined (Ladinian, Carnian), and are favoured as indices for all of the remaining boundaries under consideration. This is not an unusual situation in the Palaeozoic, but in the Triassic conodonts have competed with traditional ammonoid indices, unlike later Mesozoic periods wherein conodonts no longer existed. Although there is no denying the pivotal role of ammonoids in Triassic timescale studies, conodonts benefit from their greater abundance, widespread distribution, and great resilience. Hence, they can often provide a continuous bed-by-bed sampling record, and occur in a variety of strata representing marine habitats ranging from deepocean to shallow-shelf, as well as in rocks metamorphosed to at least greenschist grade. Of course, like many other common fossils, they offer no solution to the dating and correlation of nonmarine strata.

This paper reviews the current status of conodont succession around each Triassic stage boundary, and shows how they may be used to define Triassic GSSPs (Fig. 1). In the following account, the authorship of species is noted only at their first mention.

Illustrated specimens are deposited in the National Type Collection of Invertebrate and Plant Fossils at the Geological Survey of Canada, 601 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0E8 Canada.

## Base Triassic, Changshingian– Induan Boundary (Figs 2 & 3)

The GSSP of the Permian–Triassic Boundary (PTB) was ratified by the International Union of Geological Sciences in 2001 (Yin et al. 2001). It is defined at the First Appearance Datum (FAD) of the conodont Hindeodus parvus (Kozur & Pjatakova) within the H. praeparvus Kozur–H. parvus–
Isarcicella isarcica (Huckriede) lineage (Ding et al.

1996; Kozur 1996) at the base of Bed 27c of Meishan section D, Changxing County, Zhejiang Province, South China. Focus on this boundary led to a substantial revision of Hindeodus and the derivative Isarcicella (Orchard 2007b, p. 97 –98). Forty years ago, only single species of Hindeodus ('Anchignathodus' typicalis Sweet) and Isarcicella ('Spathognathodus' isarcicus) were identified in PTB strata. The impetus generated by research on the boundary has now resulted in the differentiation of at least 25 species of these two genera, including a subdivision of H. latidentatus Kozur, Mostler & Rahimi-Yazd, the originally proposed precursor of H. parvus, into two subspecies. One of these, H. praeparvus, is now being regarded as the immediate forerunner of the PTB index, whereas H. latidentatus is part of an entirely different Hindeodus lineage according to Nicoll et al. (2002). Similarly, H. parvus and other derivatives have been subdivided, and the phylogeny of the group is becoming increasingly refined (Nicoll et al. 2002; Perri &
Farabegoli 2003) with many stratigraphically useful species now identified (Fig. 2). Hindeodus From: LUCAS, S. G. (ed.) The Triassic Timescale. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 334, 139– 161.

DOI: 10.1144/SP334.7 0305-8719/10/$15.00 \# The Geological Society of London 2010.



parvus has a worldwide distribution not only throughout Tethys but also in western Pangaea
(Paull & Paull 1994) and the Boreal region (Henderson & Baud 1996), and it occurs both in shallow water and pelagic deposits (Kozur 1996). In some biofacies, Hindeodus occurs alone (e.g. Werfen facies), but elsewhere Neogondolella (Clarkina of authors) is also common due to palaeoecological factors, as discussed by Nicoll et al. (2002). In these cases, the succession within Neogondolella provides a parallel zonation, as it does throughout the Late Permian.

One particularly useful PTB species of Neogondolella is N. taylorae Orchard, which characterizes the lowest Triassic at Selong (Orchard et al. 1994)
and Spiti (Orchard & Krystyn 1998). The forerunner of the latter species is N. zhejiangensis (Mei) (¼
Clarkina praetaylorae Kozur: Kozur 2004; Chen et al. 2008). Reports of N. taylorae in latest Permian strata in Iran (Kozur 2005) and China (Ji et al. 2006) suggest that both that species, and several others first described from the basal Triassic, originated during the Permian. According to Korte et al. (2004), there are additional species that are missing from the latest Permian part of the GSSP succession at Meishan. Apparently, several lineages of neogondolellaceans can be differentiated among PTB populations, many of which were originally submerged in Neogondolella carinata (Clark), a species that commonly occurs in Griesbachian strata. Clarkina may be a suitable name for one of these lineages. Another important line that provides zonal indices links N. nassichuki Orchard with the progressively younger N. krystyni Orchard, N. discreta Orchard & Krystyn, and Sweetospathodus kummeli (Sweet) (Orchard 2007b).

## Induan –Olenekian Boundary (Figs 4 & 5)

The conodont succession around the Induan– Olenekian Boundary (IOB) is best known from two localities: the West Pingdingshan Section in Chaohu, Anhui Province, eastern China (Zhao et al. 2007, 2008a, b), and the Mud section in the Pin valley of Spiti, India (Krystyn et al. 2007a, b; Orchard & Krystyn 2007; Orchard 2007e). The latter locality is favoured as GSSP because of its better ammonoid record. The first appearance of the conodont Neospathodus waageni Sweet sensu lato has been chosen as the best datum for definition, as suggested by Tong et al. (2004a). In Chaohu, this datum lies 26 cm below the FAD of poorly preserved ammonoids assigned to Flemingites and Euflemingites (Tong et al. 2004b; Zakharov 2004). In Spiti, the boundary strata include a Gyronites fauna that is replaced by a succession of flemingitid ammonoid faunas (Krystyn et al. 2007a, b) (Fig. 4).

In spite of its widespread distribution, both the sub-speciation and origin of Neospathodus waageni is the subject of ongoing research. In general, the late Induan (Dienerian) conodont record is low in diversity and most commonly consists of specimens assigned to Neospathodus dieneri Sweet. Zhao et al. (2007) distinguished three morphotypes of this species based on the posterior denticle formation, and suggested that morphotype 3 of N. dieneri (with reduced posterior denticles)
gave rise to N. waageni. Orchard (2007b) suggested an alternative origin in N. pakistanensis Sweet, which has posterior denticulation similar to that of N. waageni. All these taxa are morphologically similar and differ largely in the characteristics of the posterior denticles and in the relative length: height ratio of the elements. Again, this reflects the initial stages in the major diversification of Neospathodus around the IOB, which almost certainly included changes in their multielement configuration, too. Little is known about the apparatuses of these taxa at the IOB, although later TRIASSIC CONODONTS AND THEIR ROLE IN STAGE BOUNDARY DEFINITION



142



Smithian waageni morphotypes are believed to be examples of Novispathodus.

Zhao et al. (2004) identified three variants of N. waageni, two of which (N. waageni eowaageni Zhao & Orchard and N. waageni waageni) are now regarded as subspecies, and one of which
(N. posterolongatus Zhao & Orchard) has subsequently been given species status. These three taxa appeared at slightly different levels in the Chaohu section: N. waageni eowaageni first, followed by N. posterolongatus and then N. waageni waageni. This is not clearly the case in Spiti, where Orchard & Krystyn (2007) emphasized the intraspecific variation of N. waageni by differentiating five early Olenekian morphotypes. Zhao et al. (2008a) added a sixth morphotype. The stratigraphic value of these variants has yet to be clearly demonstrated, so the FAD of N. waageni sensu lato is currently taken as the base of the Olenekian. However, the variants do serve to emphasize the tremendous evolutionary radiation that was taking place at the beginning of the Olenekian
(early Smithian) (Orchard 2007b).

In the Lower Triassic, China was located in the eastern part of low latitude Tethys, whereas Spiti represents higher palaeolatitude Gondwanaland margin. The differing faunal provincialities in these two regions led to some differences in the conodont faunas around the IOB, particularly the abundance of Neospathodus pakistanensis and Borinella nepalensis (Kozur & Mostler) in Spiti, and the absence of the latter taxon in China. Other conodont guide fossils for the IOB include Neospathodus chii Zhao & Orchard, N. concavus Zhao & Orchard, and N. cyclodontus Zhao & Orchard, which are derivatives of N. dieneri; N. spitiensis Goel, which is the successor of N. posterolongatus; and the peculiar platform elements Eurygnathodus costatus Staesche and E. hamadai Koike. The first representatives of Discretella? and Spathicuspus also appear in the early Olenekian (Fig. 4).

## Olenekian –Anisian Boundary (Figs 6 & 7)

The most complete ammonoid succession known from the Olenekian –Anisian boundary (OAB) interval in Tethys is within condensed Hallstatt limestone facies at Desli Caira in Dobrogea, Romania, where the latest Olenekian Deslicairitesbearing ammonoid beds are succeeded by beds with early Anisian Paracrochordiceras and Japonites, and then by an interval characterized as the Aegeiceras ugra beds (Graˇdinaru et al. 2007).

Other significant biotic changes involving conodonts, orthocerids, nautilids, and foraminiferids are recognized at this palaeontologically-defined boundary (Graˇdinaru et al. 2007), which is located in between two short normal magnetic polarity intervals, and close to the end of a gradual increase in d13C isotope values.

In Nevada, USA, ammonoids of the early Anisian Japonites welteri Zone overlie those of the Spathian Neopopanoceras haugi Zone (Bucher 1989; Guex et al. 2005a, b), whereas in Union Wash, California (Stone et al. 1991), an additional latest Spathian interval, the Courtilloticeras stevensi beds are differentiated (Galfetti et al. 2007). The ammonoid zonation established in western and northern Canada (Tozer 1994) places the Silberlingites mulleri Zone, which is younger than the basal Anisian, above the late Spathian Keyserlingites

Fig. 3. (Continued) Key conodonts from the Permian–Triassic (Changshingian– Induan) boundary. Catalogue numbers of specimens are given first, followed by age and location, including GSC curation number (cur.); followed by field sample number. All x80 (for which scale bar ¼ 200 microns), unless stated otherwise.

1– 3. Neogondolella krystyni Orchard. GSC 101739, from Griesbachian of Guling, Spiti (GSC cur. C– 302288; Guling3).

4– 6. Neogondolella discreta Orchard & Krystyn. GSC 101746, from Griesbachian of Guling, Spiti (GSC cur.

C–302288; Guling5).

7, 8. Sweetognathodus kummeli (Sweet). GSC 132596, from Dienerian of Guling, Spiti (GSC V– 000426; GU– 6). x100.

12. Neogondolella carinata (Clark). GSC 101734, from Griesbachian of Guling, Spiti (GSC cur. C–302288; Guling3). 13. Hindeodus parvus (Kozur & Pjatakova). Morphotype 3 of Mei 1996. GSC 101761, from Griesbachian of Lalung, Spiti (GSC cur. C– 302291; Lalung3– 1). x100.

14. Isarcicella staeschei Dai & Zhang. GSC 101757, from Griesbachian of Lingti, Spiti (GSC cur. V –000416; L4).

x125.

9– 11. Neogondolella nassichuki Orchard. Holotype, GSC 01685, from Griesbachian of Selong, Tibet (GSC cur.

C– 301264; U50).

15. Hindeodus latidentatus Kozur, Mostler & Rahmini-Yazd. GSC 101664, from late Changhsingian of Meishan, China
(GSC loc. C–158625; D12).

16. Hindeodus praeparvus (Kozur). GSC 101771, from Griesbachian of Lingti, Spiti (GSC cur. V –000416; L4). x125. 17, 18. Neogondolella zhejiangensis (Mei). GSC 101675, from Griesbachian of Selong, Tibet (GSC cur. C–301263; M50).

19–21. Neogondolella taylorae Orchard . Holotype GSC 101673, from Griesbachian of Selong, Tibet (GSC cur.

C– 301264; U50).



subrobustus Zone. A locality in Guandao in Guizhou Province, south China lacks a significant ammonoid fauna but does contain an important conodont succession as well as radiometrically-dated tuff beds (Lehrmann et al. 2006).

Published conodont data from each of these localities (Orchard 1994 , 2008 ; Grădinaru et al. 2007) show the traditional ammonoid-based OAB
closely coincides with the appearance of the conodont Chiosella timorensis (Nogami), whereas upper Olenekian (Spathian) strata are dominated by Triassospathodus ex gr. homeri (Bender). The conodont C. gondolelloides (Bender), the precursor of C. timorensis , straddles the boundary, appearing first in the Deslicairites beds in Romania, and in the stevensi beds in California. The relatively expanded section at Guandao, China, sampled in detail for conodonts, provides a useful corroboration of the conodont succession (Orchard et al. 2007b ).

In both the Guandao and Desli Caira sections
(Orchard et al. 2007a ), parallels may be seen in Triassospathodus homeri the range of and



Fig. 5. Key conodonts from the Induan–Olenekian boundary. Catalogue numbers of specimens are given first, followed by age and location, including GSC curation number (cur.); followed by field sample number. All x80 (for which scale bar ¼ 200 microns), unless stated otherwise.

1, 2. Neospathodus pakistanensis Sweet. GSC 120379, from Smithian of Ellesmere Island, Canada (GSC loc.

C–303178).

3, 4. Neospathodus posterolongatus Zhao & Orchard. GSC 132571, from Smithian of Spiti (GSC cur. V–000417; M03– 13). x60.

5, 6. Neospathodus spitiensis Goel. GSC 132572, from Smithian of Spiti (GSC cur. V–000420; M03–15). x60. 7, 8. Neospathodus dieneri Sweet, Morphotype 3 Zhao & Orchard. GSC 132573, from Dienerian of Ellesmere Island, Canada (GSC cur. 303171; DIC–F2).

9, 10. Eurygnathodus costatus Staesche. GSC 132574, from Smithian of Spiti (GSC cur. V– 000419; M06–13B).

11. Eurygnathodus hamadai (Koike). GSC 132575, from Smithian of Spiti (GSC cur. V– 000419; M06– 13B). x120. 12, 13. Borinella nepalensis (Kozur & Mostler). GSC 132576, from Smithian of Spiti (GSC cur. V –000418; MO6–13A1).

14, 15. Neospathodus waageni Sweet, Morphotype 5. GSC 132577, from Smithian of Spiti (GSC cur. V –000421; M04–15B).
Gladigondolella carinata into the basal Anisian. In China, Spathicuspus spathi (Sweet) also ranges into the basal Anisian and overlaps with the appearance of Gladigondolella tethydis (Huckriede) and Chiosella? n. sp. A Orchard, which are useful supplementary Anisian conodont markers in Tethyan regions. Neogondolella ex gr. N. regalis Mosher appears slightly later in both China and Romania, although in North America similar forms appear first within the Spathian (Orchard



2007b , 2008). This boundary interval is marked by a significant faunal change as the proportion of homeri and S. spathi drops dramatically T.

(Orchard et al. 2007a , Figs 4–5). Nicoraella germanica (Kozur) is a distinctive and widespread early Anisian species, and Neospathodus triangularis Bender is a typical late Spathian one.

Prior to 1995, the differentiation of Chiosella gondolelloides and C. timorensis was not widely accepted (see Orchard 1995 ; Grădinaru et al. 2006 ), so older literature is ambiguous in the sense that the two species of Chiosella were often combined. Similarly, at least some early reports of C. timorensis from the Spathian of the USA
(Collinson & Hassenmueller 1978) were based on Triassospathodus homeri (Orchard 1994), which completely dominates collections from the late Spathian Haugi Zone. The latter species is similar in some respects to C. timorensis but is much shorter and lacks platform flanges. It was thought to be ancestral to Chiosella (Bender 1970), but this is not supported by their significantly different multielement apparatuses (Orchard 2005). Chiosella n. sp. A, characterized by a strong terminal cusp, is a form that appears slightly later in Tethys than the other Chiosella species, more or less coincident in both Guandao sections with a 'second wave' of Chiosella that is separated from the first by a

 followed by age and location, including GSC curation number (cur.); followed by field sample number. All x80 (for which scale bar ¼ 200 microns), unless stated otherwise.

1– 3. Gladigondolella tethydis (Huckriede). GSC 132578, from Anisian of Wadi Alwa, Oman (GSC cur. C– 158458; 118C).

4. Nicoraella germanica (Kozur), GSC 101560, from Anisian of Nama, China (GSC cur. V–000424; NMC–104). 5. 'Neospathodus' triangularis Bender. GSC 132579, from Spathian of Tobin Range, Nevada, USA (GSC cur.

O– 64700).

Downloaded from http://sp.lyellcollection.org/ at University of Texas At El Paso on January 5, 2015
narrow interval from which the genus has not been recovered (Orchard et al. 2007a, Figs 4 –5).

## Anisian –Ladinian Boundary (Figs 8 & 9)

The GSSP of the Anisian –Ladinian boundary
(ALB) is defined at the appearance of the ammonoid Eoprotrachyceras curionii in the Caffaro River bed near Bagolino in the Italian Dolomites (Brack et al.

2005). The appearance of the conodont Budurovignathus praehungaricus (Kovacs) near the top of the underlying Nevadites secedensis Zone provides a proxy for the ALB. This conodont species probably developed from Neogondolella aequidentata Kozur, Krainer & Lutz and, in turn, is the precursor of the younger Budurovignathus species that are important in Ladinian biochronology.

Additional and often more abundant conodont taxa of the ALB beds belong to the groups of Neogondolella constricta (Mosher & Clark), Paragondolella excelsa Mosher, and N. alpina (Kozur &
Mostler). However, most of these taxa appear well below the boundary, and several range across it.

Other useful ALB taxa, including Neogondolella postcornuta (Kovacs), 'Ng.' trammeri (Kozur), and Gladigondolella malayensis Nogami, appear confined to Tethyan successions.

In North America, the most complete ALB
successions occur in the Prida Formation (Star Peak Group) in the Humboldt Range of northwestern Nevada, specifically at the 'Fossil Hill' and 'Saurian Hill' sites documented by Silberling & Nichols (1982). This was the type area where Silberling & Tozer (1968) defined (in ascending order) the upper Anisian Gymnotoceras rotelliformis, Parafrechites meeki, and Frechites occidentalis zones, and the lower Ladinian Eoprotrachyceras subasperum Zone, and where more recent work by Bucher & Orchard (1995) intercalibrated the ammonoid and conodont faunas. The Occidentalis Zone at the top of the Anisian originally comprised, in ascending order, the Nevadites hyatti beds, Nevadites humboldtensis beds, Paranevadites furlongi beds, and Paranevadites gabbi beds, although more recently the first of these have been dropped
(Ovtcharova et al. 2006). The first occurrence of protrachyceratids has been regarded as defining the base of the Ladinian stage, which includes a succession of differing Eoprotrachyceras beds, of which the second comprise the Eoprotrachyceras lahontanum beds (Bucher & Orchard 1995).

Two levels of significant conodont faunal change are identified within the ALB interval in Nevada, although details of the succession are unpublished.

One level corresponds to the base of the Occidentalis Zone (N. hyatti beds), the other to the Eoprotrachyceras lahontanum beds. The first is marked by the appearance of several new taxa, and the reappearance of others. Both Neogondolella cornuta Budurov & Stefanov, a member of the N. constricta group, and Paragondolella liebermani (Kovacs &
Krystyn) become more common, and derivatives of theN. szaboi(Kovacs)–N. alpina stock, including N. ex gr. N. pridaensis (Nicora, Kovacs & Mietto) and N. n. sp. B, are often dominant; N. aequidentata also appears. The second distinctive conodont datum occurs in the Eoprotrachyceras lahontanum beds and is marked by the appearance of common Budurovignathus praehungaricus, a proxy for the ALB, rare B. gabriellae Kozur, Krainer & Mostler, and new Paragondolella species.

## Ladinian–Carnian Boundary (Figs 10 & 11)

The Ladinian–Carnian boundary (LCB) is defined at the appearance of the ammonoid Daxatina canadensis at the Prati di Stuores/Stuores Wiesen section in the Italian Dolomites (Manco et al.

2004; Mietto et al. 2007). Unfortunately, conodonts are very scarce, due to the high sedimentation rate in this part of the section, but they become more frequent in higher beds associated with the ammonoid Trachyceras aon, the level at which the base of the Carnian was traditionally drawn. The conodont Metapolygnathus ex gr. M. polygnathiformis (Budurov & Stefanov), characteristic of the Carnian, first occurs close to the Daxatina datum, although it is very rare at the GSSP site.

Other areas that have provided key data on the LCB are sections in Spiti, India; New Pass in Nevada, USA; and the Liard Basin in northeastern British Columbia, Canada. The classical sections of the Spiti Valley in the Western Himalayas, India, have shown that the appearance of