
## The Merits Of Dispositional Moral Realism

KEVIN MICHAEL DELAPP
Converse College, 580 East Main Street, Spartanburg, SC 29302-0006, USA; e-mail: kevin.delapp@converse.edu

## 1. Introduction

One of the challenges facing modern defenses of moral realism is the difficulty of articulating a plausible moral ontology that avoids the extravagances of Platonism. Realists have unfortunately been reticent on this issue, rarely addressing the question of what it is that moral judgments are true in virtue of or what aspect of the world it is to which true moral judgments correspond. But if realists have been wary of confronting ontological issues, irrealists have been quick to supply ontological pictures on their behalf. One of the most damaging, but pervasive ontological accounts foisted upon realists has been a primary quality model of objects. For example, J. L. Mackie characterized realism as the view that moral values are somehow part of the ''furniture of the world.''1 Irrealists are not to blame for this distortion. Objects are a familiar and relatively easilyarticulated entity, and realists have simply not provided many explicit alternatives. However, silence here should not imply consent.

One alternative model of realist values has been offered by John McDowell.2 McDowell suggests that we understand moral values as analogous to secondary qualities, which he interprets as dispositions to bring about certain experiences and perceptions under certain conditions.

McDowells theory has been subject to many concerns and objections. If successful, though, it has the advantage of clarifying how realist values could be belief-independent while still preserving some connection to human sensibility. After revisiting McDowells analogy, a version of the dispositional model of moral values will be defended here. One of the reasons such a theory has been resisted has been due to a misunderstanding of moral realism as a view that would have us deny any metaphysical connection between moral values and moral agents. Although moral realists are committed to the belief-independence of values, realists need to be cautious not to divorce morality too much from human nature.

Too deep of a rift between actual moral agents and free-floating disembodied values has given rise to well-known problems about moral motivation and knowledge. To address this, a distinction will be urged between moral realism and moral objectivism. Moral values can be real without being objective, and McDowells dispositional account will be requisitioned to help articulate this possibility.

## 2. Realism Versus Objectivism

Moral realism may be defined as the view that supports the conjunction of the following three propositions. First, moral statements are truth-apt. Second, at least some moral statements are in fact true. Third, to say that a statement is true is to say that it bears a correspondence to features of the world that exist independently of the evidence or beliefs of anyone or everyone, or even of epistemically-idealized agents.

It is worth noting that this definition, perhaps controversially, excludes as genuinely realist any view which would have us interpret truth according to non-correspondence theories. Thus, for instance, sophisticated noncognitivist accounts which preserve moral truth by reference to deflationary or minimalist theories of truth are not legitimate expressions of moral realism as here defined. In addition, the definition does not preclude epistemically-idealized agents from adequately or reliably reflecting moral truth, provided that they do not constitute it: according to realism, individuals may be authorities on moral value, but not authors of it. At any rate, some version of the above definition is shared by a majority of philosophers who call themselves moral realists.3 Moreover, by saying that moral values exist independently of evidence or beliefs is not to affirm the overly strong view that moral values are independent of any human sensibility. It is consistent with realism as defined above that the expression of moral values necessarily involves referencing certain features of agents. This difference is too often conflated by realists and irrealists alike. A contrast between realism and objectivism with respect to values may help clarify this distinction.

In twentieth-century meta-ethics, ''objectivity'' has frequently been used synonymously with ''realism.''4 This association is misleading for several reasons. For one thing, objectivity is sometimes associated with the view that moral value is impersonal or otherwise lacking in what David Brink has called a ''qualitative dimension.''5 Peter Railton calls this sense of ''objectivity'' the impartialist sense and contrasts it with two other closely related types of ethical objectivity, an objectual sense and a deliberative sense.6 The objectual sense is an expression of the view that we can make informed judgments and acquire knowledge without bias or prejudice. This sense of ''objectivity'' is implicit when we tell people to try and be objective when making a decision. With the deliberative sense of ''objectivity'' we make reference to the following of valid rules and forms of reasoning. Indeed, part of the validity of the rules is supposed to consist in their being accessible to anyone who thinks rationally about them. The rules are thus objective in the sense that their acceptability will range over everyone who follows them. It seems that any of these three senses of objectivity are compatible with moral realism as understood in the above definition. However, they are not equivalent to it. Someone can think that moral values are not determined by anyones beliefs about them without also thinking that we can or should ever be objective.

There is an additional sense of ''objectivity'' that should be resisted by realists. Objectivity may also be characterized by what Bernard Williams has called an ''absolute conception of reality.''7 According to Williams, something admits of an absolute conception if and only if it is ''nonperspectival.''8 However, it is exceedingly unclear how a conception of reality could be in principle non-perspectival. There seems to be a patent absurdity in the idea of a non-perspectival conception of reality when our very act of conceiving constitutes a perspective. How can agents characterize reality by absolute conception if agents are prevented from using their concepts in the first place? As Railton points out, the idea of an absolute conception appears self-defeating for these reasons: ''a standpoint without any subjectivity is a standpoint with no point of viewwhich is to say, no standpoint at all.''9 Thomas Nagels consideration of the so-called view from nowhere also helps shed light on some of the problems which face an absolute conception of reality.10 As Nagel observes, there is a tension implicit in any attempt to reconcile the feeling that a particular experience is uniquely our own with the impulse to abstract from anything peculiar to an individual perspective. Though we feel pulled in the direction of objectivity, we find it impossible to leave behind our subjectivity fully. Our subjectivity is itself a part of the very world which we seek to identify with the objective perspective. Stepping outside of our own embodied perspective is useful in trying to identify bias or prejudice; but exclusively catering our ontology to such a perspective would eliminate too much, resulting in what Nagel calls objective blindness. David Wiggins makes a similar point, arguing that one of the incoherencies of reductive views such as non-cognitivism is that they collapse what he calls the inner view we subjectively take toward our first-personal experiences into the objectifying outer view according to which we view things third-personally. As Wiggins says, ''The outside view must pay some heed to the differences that the inner view perceives.''11 In this way, we can distinguish moral realism from moral objectivism.

Moral realism is the view that moral values exist independently of any evidential or cognitive contributions of agents. By contrast, moral objectivism is the view that moral values exist in a way that makes no reference to any features of agents whatsoever. It seems possible to be a realist without being an objectivist in this sense: we can believe that moral values exist independently of our beliefs about them, even if we also believe that the content of such values nonetheless makes reference to us and our capacities.

Morality may be essentially about us, but it is no less real for this fact. In this way, moral value does not need to differ dramatically from other familiar entities. A desk, for instance, exists independently of anyones beliefs about it, even though it would be impossible to meaningfully articulate the concept of being a desk without reference to certain anthropocentric interests and perspectives. We may call this objectivity if we like, as long as we are careful to distinguish it from any non-perspectival version of an absolute conception. Not only does such a view threaten to be self-defeating, but it also arbitrarily eliminates us and our concepts from reality. Our subjectivities exist and must be accounted for in any objective perspective that purports to be complete or absolute.

## 3. Dispositions And Secondary Qualities

Another reason to distinguish moral realism from moral objectivism is that moral objectivism connotes an ontology of objects, which is a mode of existence inappropriate to values even as construed by realists. For instance, it seems clear that morality is not spatiotemporally bounded: we do not say that goodness exists ''over there.'' Although particular actions, events, and characters that instantiate moral values might be spatiotemporally bounded, the values themselves are sine loco et anno. Though moral values for a realist are entities in some sense, they are not objects. Realists are committed to less ontologically than objectivists. This is yet another reason to prefer the term ''realism'' to the entrenched nomenclature of ''objectivism.''
Despite the absurdity of envisioning moral properties as literal, spatiotemporal objects, this is the de facto characterization which has tacitly dominated many discussions of the metaphysics of moral realism. Mackie described the objectivist values which he indicted as erroneous as
''structural elements'' of the world.12 Furthermore, he utilized Humes discussion of the minds ''propensity to spread itself on external objects''
as representative of what he saw as the objectivists error.13 Commenting from the realist side, David Brink has also stated that moral realists are
''usually'' characterized as analogous to scientific realists about disciplines such as physics and chemistry, which in turn are taken to involve the study of ''real objects.''14 The point here is not that such writers themselves envision moral properties as spatiotemporal, but that the default language of ''furniture,'' ''structural elements,'' ''objects,'' and entities similar to the entities studied by physicists all have engendered an implicit association of moral realism with a primary quality ontology.

If realist moral values cannot exist as primary qualities, objects or anything spatiotemporally bounded, we could say, at this point, that moral values must therefore not really exist. However, this would be to abandon realism and instead to commit ourselves to a rarefied ontology of exclusively spatiotemporal entities. Even deniers of realism should be wary of this sort of restricted ontology. After all, we do commonly recognize the reality of entities that are not spatiotemporally bounded.

Even some of the items in the ontology of physics are admitted as real without being spatiotemporally located, including subatomic particles, forces, or fields. Only a ''rough desert-dweller,'' to use an evocative phrase of David Lewis, would conceive of an ontology strictly limited to objects.15 But if the ontology of moral value is not the ontology of an object, what is it? What ontological status can we give it that preserves the existence that realists want, but that also does not render value spatiotemporal? Realists have largely taken recourse to two different strategies at this point. On the one hand, there are realists who have embraced a sui generis understanding of moral properties. Persuaded largely by G. E. Moores open-question argument, such realists are skeptical of accounts that involve the definition, identification, or reduction of evaluative properties to any other sort of properties, natural as well as supernatural.16 On the other hand, there are contemporary moral realists who have been more optimistic about such accounts and seek to articulate co-extensions between moral properties and certain sets of natural properties. They attempt to maintain the belief-independence of moral values by linking them with scientific, behavioral or psychological properties which are themselves belief-independent and causally-efficacious.17 Despite the attractions each strategy might have for realists, there are certain disadvantages that bear mentioning. Put simply, a sui generis construal of realism threatens to render values hyper-real, divorced radically from anything else in the realm of human experience and sensibility. Such unparsimonious realism should be accepted only as a last philosophical resort. Conversely, accounts by naturalists who maintain that moral values are co-extensional with certain scientific, behavioral, or psychological properties threaten to render moral values not quite realist enough. For example, it is commonly argued by such realists that while moral properties may be co-extensionally reduced to non-moral properties, a comparable co-intensional reduction must be resisted. However, it is unclear why we ought to persist in the usage of sui generis moral language if the values picked out by such language are not themselves sui generis.

In any event, let us consider a third frequently neglected option that may offer more of a middle ground between the two more dominant forms of realism. The alternative has been given best expression by John McDowell, who argues that moral value could have the same ontological status as color.18 For McDowell, color is a secondary quality and as such exists as a relational or dispositional property between external objects and perceivers. For example, the color red consists in the disposition of an object to produce in an observer red perceptions in appropriate epistemic situations.

Though the perception is in the mind, the power that produces the perception is not: it is ontologically grounded in external states of affairs that exist in the belief-independent way discussed above, for example, reflectance properties of physical surfaces. Color just is this power. In an analogous way, moral values could exist as powers to produce corresponding moral perceptions. This model is an attempt to preserve the realism of moral values by locating them in states of affairs that are independent of the beliefs of any agent, in the sense that the states of affairs do not obtain solely in virtue of the fact that there are beliefs about them.

The advantage of this kind of dispositional model for realism is that it allows moral values to exist independently of beliefs, without thereby endorsing the implausible view that moral values exist independently of any human sensibility. Morality, after all, fundamentally concerns agents, in the sense that it is vacuous to express a moral claim without also referencing certain features of agents. Ignoring this feature of morality is what makes objectivism guilty of the objective blindness that Nagel eschews and the incoherence that Wiggins derides. Moral values can be belief-independently real even if the articulation of the values necessarily requires referencing features of agents. For example, moral claims such as
''capital punishment is morally wrong'' cannot be meaningfully expressed without reference to concepts such as death, rights, justice, desert, suffering, or deterrence, none of which in turn make sense independently of features of our biology, psychology, and social-political frameworks.

This is not to say that an agent cannot utter the words ''capital punishment is morally wrong'' without explicitly referencing such anthropocentric factors. Such expressions are uttered frequently with presumably no deeper meta-ethical commitments in mind. Yet such an expression cries out for such meta-ethical unpacking. Relativists such as Mackie might unpack the utterance by arguing that the speaker tacitly assumes that wrongness exists as some objective property attached to instances of capital punishment, but that such a speaker is unconsciously committing a naı¨ve error. Instead, for a relativist, the wrongness of capital punishment would consist in a certain enculturation of social norms that arose historically in response to certain contingent biological or sociological pressures. Realists, by contrast, would need to unpack the utterance by grounding the wrongness in something independent of such enculturation. But however such unpacking proceeds, it eventually must invoke anthropocentric concepts such as the ones mentioned above. To appreciate this point, we may imagine trying to explain the content of the sentence ''capital punishment is morally wrong'' to someone unfamiliar with the definition of ''capital punishment.'' How else are we to define ''capital punishment'' without bringing anthropocentric concepts such as death, law, or government into the discussion?

The notion of unpacking is largely epistemological. We engage in such elaborations in order to understand and justify the claim that ''capital punishment is morally wrong.'' However, it would be a drastic overstatement of the autonomy of metaphysics to argue that the epistemological nature of such unpacking has no metaphysical bearing. After all, such elaborations help reveal what the nature and essence of capital punishment is, and that is a metaphysical matter. The question then is what metaphysical model best accommodates the anthropocentric elaboration. For a realist, a dispositionalist account of value has a prima facie attraction in virtue of the fact that it purports to allow for at least some interplay between the existence of values and human sensibility. The challenge for dispositionalists is how to prevent the interplay from collapsing into the constructivism and relativism that realists wish to avoid.

To highlight how a dispositional model might be compatible with realism, a dispositionalist would insist that colors would still exist even in a world of no actual color perceivers. By analogy, moral values would still exist even in a world of no actual moral agents. In such scenarios, there would be no color or moral perceptions, since there would be no color or moral perceivers. But the powers to produce the corresponding color or moral perceptions in appropriately situated epistemic agents would still obtain even if there were no such agents. The colors and values would exist, as it were, un-actualized. Robert Schwartz, in his commentary on the meta-philosophy of J. L. Austin, has expressed this concept by critiquing the classic epistemological dichotomy between experiences which are taken from the world versus experiences which are given by the world. Instead, Schwartz interprets Austin as arguing that, ''visual experience results from contributions of both the environment and the perceiver, and these contributions are inextricably joined.''19 In an analogous way, moral experience for a dispositional realist, results from inextricably joined relationships between an agent and belief-independent features of the world.

Though provocative, McDowells defense of this sort of dispositional theory of moral value has been generally greeted with criticism. Objections to McDowells view can be collated into two categories. On the one hand, many philosophers dispute McDowells analysis of color and secondary qualities in general. This kind of objection usually stems from either alternate interpretations of the canon of philosophical texts related to secondary qualities, or else from contemporary accounts gleaned from color science that seem to suggest some form of color irrealism.20 On the other hand, there are philosophers who argue that, whatever the fate of color, moral values are fundamentally disanalogous. Here we will concentrate on the objection that there is a disanalogy. The view defended is that, whether or not any particular philosopher actually held a dispositional theory of secondary qualities and whether or not color itself is properly analyzed dispositionally, the relational ontology articulated above is a helpful way to see how realist values could still exist without being objective.

There are several ways in which colors and moral values might be thought disanalogous. One objection to McDowells analogy has been articulated by Crispin Wright.21 Wright defends what he calls the order of determination test for whether or not a concept is constructive or extension-determining. The test is supposed to show whether it is our concept itself that determines which items fit the concept, or whether it is instead the items themselves that determine the concepts we have about them. Wright maintains that secondary qualities pass his test, but that moral values fail it. On Wrights view, secondary qualities are not beliefindependently real, but moral values are. Moral judgments track moral properties whereas color judgments constitute color properties.

Wrights order of determination test provides a nuanced and sophisticated way to support a disanalogy between value and secondary qualities. However, it is ironic to note that if his test is persuasive, then moral values emerge as more real than secondary qualities: realists lose the battle for the dispositional analogy, but appear to win the war for beliefindependence. Either way, Wrights test has several limitations. In particular, Wright thinks that one of the reasons why our concepts of secondary qualities are irrealist is because we are able to articulate a priori informative conditions for when we are epistemically justified in making color judgments. The fact that the conditions serve as the best explanations of color judgments suggests that there is nothing more to color judgments than the satisfaction of the conditions and that, therefore, our color concepts determine their extensions rather than the other way around. Suffice it to say that this criterion for the order of determination test seems already to presuppose an irrealist interpretation of secondary qualities which McDowell does not accept. If secondary qualities are instead interpreted as powers located in external objects or states of affairs, then the extensions of color concepts, the powers themselves, determine the correct application of the concepts after all.

## 4. Color-Value Disanalogies

In addition to Wrights criticism, let us explore four additional objections to McDowells view. First, it might be thought that whereas color terms are predicated of objects, moral values are instead predicated of events, actions, and characters. The objection here is that to make the color-value analogy is to commit some kind of category mistake by conflating objects with actions and events. An initial response to this objection is to point out that McDowells comparison of value to color is only supposed to be suggestive of an analogy. This does not mean that the two need to be identical in sharing all and only the same features and properties. It is not damaging to the color-value analogy as an analogy that there are minor differences. However, a more persuasive response would be to deny that there is any category mistake involved in making the color-value analogy in the first place. For one thing, it may be possible to rephrase descriptions of events and actions in terms of strings of objects and properties, such that to predicate something of an action is no different than to predicate something of multiple individual objects. For another thing, we know that our manifest image of objects as macroscopic solids bearing colors is not supported by our scientific image of objects as composed of microscopic entities. We predicate color of manifest objects, but if manifest objects are themselves relations between smaller scientific objects, then color is in fact predicated on relations. If this is right, then there is no disanalogy with values being predicated of events. To put the matter differently, there is no disanalogy between color and value if we think of the surface-reflectance properties of objects upon which colors supervene, as well as the actions and intentions upon which moral values supervene, as all simply different sorts of states of affairs.

A second alleged disanalogy between color and value is sometimes expressed by noting that, while color is psychologically inefficacious, morality is intrinsically motivating. Simon Blackburn phrases this objection by claiming that morality is importantly always relative to some role, whereas color ''just sits there.''22 However, while moral talk and color talk are certainly used in different ways and for different purposes, it would be an overstatement of this disanalogy to say that only morality is motivating, and that only color just sits there. For one thing, it is not clear that a moral realist, even on a dispositionalist theory like McDowells, needs to be committed to moral values being intrinsically motivating. Indeed, it seems possible for an individual to possess certain types of moral beliefs, and yet be unmoved to act. It is also misleading to say that color just sits there in a completely causally inert way. After all, the colors of things determine how we sort the things. The sorting is not merely aesthetic: it seems plausible that color judgments can play vital evolutionary roles as well. For example, certain colors may indicate that something is poisonous. In this way, the color of an object can motivate us to avoid it. Again, the point here is not to defend a particular view of moral motivation, but merely to preserve an analogy. If color is not motivationally efficacious, then neither does morality need to be; and if color is ultimately motivationally efficacious, then morality can be too.

Blackburn also argues that it is possible for us as human beings to change in a way that would cause us to see everything as blue which we now see as red. This suggests a third potential disanalogy, since a realist would not want to say that we could similarly change to think of everything as bad which we currently think of as good. On his own version of this disanalogy, Blackburn points out that if our moral perceptions did change such that we started regarding as good everything we currently regard as bad, we would judge our new perceptions to be horribly mistaken from the perspective of our current perceptions. However, this still cannot support a disanalogy with color, since we would also judge inverted color perceptions as horribly mistaken, albeit not morally horrible, from the perspective of our current color perceptions. Indeed, accounting for a change in moral perception as constituting a mistake seems to presuppose a standard of moral value that is independent of what we currently think about or could ever come to think about it, and this sounds extremely similar to what a realist wants to say all along.

Indeed, the scenario of changed color perceptions seems supported by the possibility of such phenomena as inverted spectra and absent qualia. Why could such phenomena not be possible in an analogous way in the case of moral values? For example, we think that most non-human animals have different mental faculties than we do, and we also think that most animals are not aware of moral values as we are. This is why we do not think it appropriate to morally judge them. We typically do not treat