# The Local To Unity Dynamic Tobit Model Anna Bykhovskaya And James A. Duffy

Abstract. This paper considers highly persistent time series that are subject to nonlinearities in the form of censoring or an occasionally binding constraint, such as are regularly encountered in macroeconomics. A tractable candidate model for such series is the dynamic Tobit with a root local to unity. We show that this model generates a process that converges weakly to a non-standard limiting process, that is constrained (regulated) to be positive, and derive the limiting distributions of the OLS estimators of the model parameters. This allows inferences to be drawn on the overall persistence of the process (as measured by the sum of the autoregressive coefficients), and for the null of a unit root to be tested in the presence of censoring. Our simulations illustrate that the conventional ADF test substantially over-rejects when the data is generated by a dynamic Tobit with a unit root. We provide an application of our methods to testing for a unit root in the Swiss franc / euro exchange rate, during a period when this was subject to an occasionally binding lower bound.

Keywords: non-negative time series, dynamic Tobit, local unit root, unit root test.

## 1. Introduction

Since the 1950s nonlinear models have played an increasingly prominent role in the analysis and prediction of time series data. In many cases, as was noted in early work by Moran (1953), linear models are unable to adequately match the features of observed time series. The efforts to develop models that enjoy the flexibility afforded by nonlinearities, while retaining the tractability of linear models, have subsequently engendered an enormous literature (see e.g. Fan and Yao, 2003; Gao, 2007; Chan, 2009; and Terasvirta *et al.*, 2010).

An important instance of non-linearity arises when data is bounded by, truncated at, or censored below some threshold, since such phenomena cannot be adequately captured - even approximately - by a linear model. Many observed series are bounded below by construction, and may spend lengthy periods at or near their lower boundary, such as unemployment rates, prices, gross sectoral trade flows, and nominal interest rates. The non-negativity of interest rates, and the resulting constraints that this may impose on the efficacy of monetary policy, has received particular attention in recent years, as central bank policy rates have remained at or near the zero lower bound for a significant portion of the past two decades, across many economies (see e.g. Mavroeidis, 2021, and the works cited therein).

A tractable model for such series, which generates both their characteristic serial dependence and censoring, is the dynamic Tobit model. In its static formulation, the model originates with Tobin (1958). In its dynamic formulation, the model typically comes in one of two We thank T. Bollerslev, V. Kleptsyn, S. Mavroeidis, and seminar participants at Cambridge, Cyprus, Duke, NES30 Conference, St Andrews, and Oxford for their helpful comments and advice on earlier drafts of this work.

2 ANNA BYKHOVSKAYA AND JAMES A. DUFFY
varieties, which we refer to as the *latent* and *censored* models. In the latent dynamic Tobit, an unobserved process {y
∗
t } follows a linear autoregression, with yt = max{y
∗
t
, 0} being observed; whereas in the censored dynamic Tobit, {yt} is modelled as the positive part of a linear function of its own lags, and an additive error (see e.g. Maddala 1983, p. 186, or Wei 1999, p. 419). In both models the right hand side may be augmented with other explanatory variables.

Relative to the latent model, the censored model has the advantage of being Markovian, which greatly facilitates its use in forecasting. It has also been successfully applied to a range of censored series, in both purely time series and panel data settings, including: the open market operations of the Federal Reserve (Demiralp and Jord`a, 2002; de Jong and Herrera, 2011); household commodity purchases (Dong *et al.*, 2012); loan charge-off rates (Liu *et al.*, 2019); credit default and overdue loan repayments (Brezigar-Masten *et al.*, 2021); and sectoral bilateral trade flows (Bykhovskaya, 2023). Recently, Mavroeidis (2021) proposed the censored and kinked structural VAR model to describe the operation of monetary policy during periods when the zero lower bound may occasionally bind on the policy rate. If only the actual interest rate (rather than some 'shadow rate') affects agents' decision making, as assumed in closely related work by Aruoba *et al.* (2022), then the univariate counterpart of this model is exactly the censored dynamic Tobit.

The present work is concerned with the censored, rather than the latent, dynamic Tobit model. In the latent model the dynamics are simply those of the latent autoregression, and so are readily understood; whereas in the censored model, the censoring affects the dynamics of
{yt} in a non-trivial manner, making the analysis rather more challenging. Indeed, establishing the stationarity or weak dependence of the censored dynamic Tobit is far from trivial, as can be seen from Hahn and Kuersteiner (2010), de Jong and Herrera (2011), Michel and de Jong
(2018), and Bykhovskaya (2023). Henceforth, all references to the 'dynamic Tobit' are to the censored version of the model.

Motivated in part by recent work on modelling nominal interest rates near the zero lower bound, our concern is with the application of this model to series that are highly persistent, so that above the censoring point they exhibit the random wandering that is characteristic of integrated processes. The appropriate configuration of the dynamic Tobit model for such series, in which the autoregressive polynomial has a root local to unity, has not been considered in the literature to date - apart from the special case of a first-order model with an exact unit root, as in Cavaliere (2004) and Bykhovskaya (2023). Our results are thus entirely new to the literature.

Our principal technical contribution, within this setting, is to derive the limiting distributions of both the standardised regressor process, and the ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimates of the parameters of the dynamic Tobit, when that model has an autoregressive root local to unity. In this setting, OLS is consistent and we obtain a usable limit theory for the estimated sum of the autoregressive coefficients, which conventionally provides a measure of the overall persistence of a process (cf. Andrews and Chen, 1994; Mikusheva, 2007). Our asymptotics provide the basis for practical unit root tests for highly persistent, censored time series. The associated t statistic coincides with the (constant only) augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) t statistic, but employs critical values modified to reflect the censoring present in the data generating process. We show, via Monte Carlo simulations, that as our critical values are larger than the conventional ADF critical values, their use eliminates the significant overrejection that may result from the naive application of the ADF test to censored data. (This tendency to over-reject the null of a unit root appears typical of models that incorporate unit roots and nonlinearities, having been also found by e.g. Hamori and Tokihisa, 1997; Kim *et al.*, 2002; and Wang and De Jong, 2013.)
Our work may be construed, more broadly, as extending the analysis of highly persistent time series, and the associated machinery of unit root testing, from a linear setting to a nonlinear setting appropriate to time series that are subject to a lower bound. In doing so, we complement the seminal work of Cavaliere (2005), which similarly sought to extend this machinery to the setting of bounded time series. Our contribution is to effect this extension within a class of nonlinear autoregressive models that have been widely applied to censored time series (as evinced by the works cited above), and which fall outside his framework.

On a technical level, the most closely related works to our own are those of Cavaliere (2004, 2005) and Cavaliere and Xu (2014), who develop the asymptotics of what they term 'limited autoregressive processes' with a near-unit root, which are (one- or two-sided) censored processes constructed by the addition of regulators to a latent linear autoregression. While their (one-sided) model has a superficial resemblance to the dynamic Tobit, there are important, but subtle differences between the two (see Section 2.4 for a discussion). Perhaps the most striking similarity is that both models, in the case of an exact unit root, give rise to processes that converge weakly to regulated Brownian motion; but when roots are merely local to unity, the limiting processes associated with these two models are distinct (see the discussion following Theorem 3.1). Convergence to regulated Brownian motions has also been obtained previously in the setting of *first-order* threshold autoregressive models with an (exact) unit root regime and a stationary regime, as considered by Liu *et al.* (2011) and Gao *et al.* (2013).

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses the model and our assumptions. Asymptotic results and corresponding tests are derived in Section 3, while supporting Monte Carlo simulations are shown in Section 4. Section 5 applies our framework to the exchange rate between the Swiss franc and the euro during a period when this rate was subject to a lower bound. Finally, Section 6 concludes. All proofs appear in the appendices. Notation. C, C
0, C
00, etc. denote generic constants that may take different values in different parts of this paper. All limits are taken as T → ∞ unless otherwise specified. p→ and d→
respectively denote convergence in probability and distribution (weak convergence). We write
'XT (r)d→ X(r) on *D[0,* 1]' to denote that {XT } converges weakly to X, where these are considered as random elements of *D[0,* 1], the space of cadlag functions on [0, 1], equipped with the uniform topology. For p ≥ 1 and X a random variable, let kXkp:= (E|X| p)
1/p.

## 2. The Dynamic Tobit Model With A Near-Unit Root

2.1. Model and assumptions. Consider a time series {yt} generated by the dynamic Tobit model of order k ≥ 1, written in augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) form,1

$$(2.1)$$
(2.1) yt =
$$y_{t}=\left[\alpha+\beta y_{t-1}+\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\phi_{i}\Delta y_{t-i}+u_{t}\right]_{+},\quad t=1,\ldots,T,$$
$\mathbf{a}=\mathbf{a}\cdot\mathbf{a}$. 
positive part of $x\in\mathbb{P}$, L.e. 

where ∆yt:= yt − yt−1, and [x]+ := max{x, 0} denotes the positive part of x ∈ R. Let

$$B(z):=1-\beta z-(1-z)\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\phi_{i}z^{i}=(1-\beta)z+(1-z)\phi(z),$$
$$(2.2)$$

where φ(z) := 1 −Pk−1
$$z):=1-\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\phi_{i}z^{i}.\,\,\mathrm{We~im}$$
i. We impose the following on the data generating process (2.1).

Assumption A1. {yt} is initialised by (possibly) random variables {y−k+1, . . . , y0}*. Moreover,*
T
−1/2y0p→ b0 *for some* b0 ≥ 0.

Assumption A2. {yt} *is generated according to* (2.1)*, where:*
1. {ut}t∈Z *is independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) with* Eut = 0 and Eu 2 t = σ 2.

2. α = αT := T
−1/2a and β = βT = exp(c/T) for some *a, c* ∈ R.

Assumption A3. There exist δu > 0 and C < ∞ *such that:*
1. E|ut| 2+δu < C.

2. E|T
−1/2y0| 2+δu < C*, and* E|∆yi| 2+δu < C for i *∈ {−*k + 2*, . . . ,* 0}.

Figure 2.1 displays a typical sample path for the dynamic Tobit (2.1), under the preceding assumptions.



The main consequences of our assumptions may be summarised as follows.

(i) By the functional central limit theorem, A2.1 implies T
−1/2 PbrTc t=1 utd→ *σW(r*) on D[0, 1], where W(·) is a standard Brownian motion. This convergence alone is sufficient to determine the asymptotics of T
−1/2ybrTc, and of the OLS estimators, when k = 1
(Theorems 3.1 and 3.3 below), but extending these results to k ≥ 2 necessitates the slightly stronger conditions on {ut} provided by A3.

(ii) In the absence of censoring, A2.2 would entail that yt has an autoregressive root within a O(T
−1) neighbourhood of real unity. Just as in that case, we shall show that in the present setting T
−1/2ybrTc converges weakly to a continuous process, albeit one that differs importantly from the diffusion process limit familiar from the uncensored case.

(iii) We require α = O(T
−1/2) in A2.2, to ensure that the drift in {yt} is of no larger order than the stochastic trend component. If this assumption were relaxed, so that e.g. α were now a non-zero constant, the large-sample behaviour of {yt} and the asymptotics of the OLS estimators would be quite different from those developed here. A fixed positive α would generate an increasing linear trend, driving yt ever further away from origin and making the censoring ultimately irrelevant; whereas a fixed negative α can lead to {yt} being stationary (see e.g. Bykhovskaya, 2023, Theorem 3).

(iv) The specific parametrisations in A2.2 are chosen merely for convenience: all of our results also hold when αT and βT more generally satisfy T
1/2αT → a and T(βT − 1) →
c. For ease of notation, we shall routinely suppress the T subscripts on αT and βT
throughout the following.

(v) Assumptions A1 and A3 imply that T
−1/2yip→ b0 for all i *∈ {−*k + 1*, . . . ,* 0}.

2.2. Non-zero lower bound. Our machinery extends straightforwardly to the case where ytis censored at some L 6= 0. Suppose (2.1) is modified to

$$(2.3)$$
(2.3) yt = max (L, α + βyt−1 +
$$y_{t}=\operatorname*{max}\left\{\mathbf{L},\ \alpha+\beta y_{t-1}+\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\phi_{i}\Delta y_{t-i}+u_{t}\right\},$$

and take L = T
1/2` for some ` ∈ R, to allow the censoring point to be of the same order of magnitude as {yt}. Defining ˜yt:= yt − L and subtracting L from both sides of (2.3), it may be verified that

$$\hat{y}_{t}=\left[\alpha+\beta\hat{y}_{t-1}+\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\phi_{i}\Delta\hat{y}_{t-i}+u_{t}\right]_{+}$$  where $\tilde{\alpha}:=\alpha+(\beta-1)\mathbf{L}$. Thus, $\{\hat{y}_{t}\}$ follows a dynamic Tobit with censoring at zero, with 
$|\mathbf{u}_{\alpha}|$
$$+\,(\beta-1)T$$
$$I^{-\tau}-\ell\,]\,-$$
drift
T
1/2α˜ = T
1/2[α + (β − 1)T
1/2`] → a + c` =: a˜
and initialisation
$$\tilde{b}_{0}=\operatorname*{plim}_{T\to\infty}T^{-1/2}\tilde{y}_{0}=\operatorname*{plim}_{T\to\infty}T^{-1/2}(y_{0}-\mathbf{L})=b_{0}-\ell.$$

All our results hold in the setting of (2.3), with appropriate modifications. For simplicity, we work with L = 0 throughout the rest of the paper, except where otherwise indicated. 2.3. Alternative representation. It will be occasionally useful to rewrite (2.1) in a form that helps to clarify the connections between the dynamic Tobit and the linear autoregressive model. We can do this by defining

$$(2.4)$$
(2.4) y
$$y_{t}^{-}:=\left[\alpha+\beta y_{t-1}+\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\phi_{i}\Delta y_{t-i}+u_{t}\right]_{-},$$

where [x]− := min{x, 0}. That is, when yt = 0, y
−
trecords the value that yt would have taken had it not been censored at zero.

Since [x]+ = x − [x]−, we may then rewrite (2.1) as

$$(2.5)$$
(2.5) yt = α + βyt−1 +
$$y_{t}=\alpha+\beta y_{t-1}+\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\phi_{i}\Delta y_{t-i}+u_{t}-y_{t}^{-}\,,$$

or equivalently, letting L denote the lag operator, as

(2.6) B(L)yt = α + ut − y
−
$\huge{\color{red}-}\;y_t^{-}$ . 
.

Thus, if we view y
−
t as an additional noise term, (2.6) takes the form of a linear autoregression. The main challenge is that y
−
tis itself a complicated non-linear object, whose presence fundamentally alters the dynamics of {yt}, even in the long run.

2.4. Connections with limited autoregressive processes. The representation (2.6) allows us to draw out the connections between our model and the limited autoregressive processes developed by Cavaliere (2004, 2005) and Cavaliere and Xu (2014). To put their model
- for the special case of a process constrained to lie in [0,∞) - in a form comparable to ours, consider a latent process {x
∗
t },

(2.7) x
$$x_{t}^{*}=\rho_{T}x_{t-1}^{*}+\varepsilon_{t},\quad\rho_{T}=1+c/T,$$
where {εt} is stationary. Define an observed process {xt}, whose increments are related to those of {x
∗
t } via

$\left(2.8\right)$ . 
(2.8) ∆xt = ∆x
$$\Delta x_{t}=\Delta x_{t}^{*}+\xi_{t}$$
where ξt
> 0 if and only if xt−1 + ∆x
∗
t < 0, so as to ensure that xt ≥ 0 for all t. In particular, if we set

(2.9) ξt
$$\underline{{{\xi}}}_{t}=-x_{t}^{-}:=-[x_{t-1}+\Delta x_{t}^{*}]_{-}$$
then {xt} will be censored at zero. When c = 0, by combining (2.7)–(2.9) we obtain
(2.10) xt = xt−1 + εt − x
−
t = [xt−1 + εt]+
as a valid representation of a limited autoregressive process censored at zero.

Both (2.6) and (2.10) describe censored processes, but have some subtle, and yet important differences. Firstly, while {yt} in (2.6) is a Markov process (with state vector (yt*, . . . , y*t−k+1)), {xt} in (2.10) will be Markov only if {εt} is i.i.d. The former is thus more suited to forecasting in the presence of higher-order dynamics. Secondly, at a technical level, the differences between the models can be seen most clearly by supposing α = 0 and β = 1, so that B(L) = (1−L)φ(L)
in (2.6), where φ(z) has all its roots outside the unit circle; and also supposing that εt =
φ(L)
−1utin (2.7). Then the dynamic Tobit (2.6) can be rewritten as

(2.11) yt = yt−1 + εt − φ(L)
$$y_{t}=y_{t-1}+\varepsilon_{t}-\phi(L)^{-1}y_{t}^{-}\,.$$
Comparing (2.10) and (2.11), we can see that the censoring affects the dynamics of {yt} and {xt} in different ways. Lagged values of y
−
t have a direct effect on future yt (via φ(L)
−1y
−
t = P∞
i=0 ciy
−
t−s
), whereas lagged x
−
t have no such effect on xt. Indeed, the only case in which {yt}
and {xt} will coincide is if φ(L) = 1 (for a further discussion of which case, see Cavaliere, 2005, Remark 2.3).

## 3. Asymptotic Results

In this section we derive the weak limits of the standardised process T
−1/2ybrTc and the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimators of the parameters of the dynamic Tobit. The latter provides the basis for a unit root test for non-negative time series.

3.1. Limiting distribution of the regressor process. Let θ := (a, b0, c), define the process

(3.1) Kθ(r) := b0 + a
$$K_{\theta}(r):=b_{0}+a\int_{0}^{r}\mathrm{e}^{-c s}\,\mathrm{d}s+\sigma\int_{0}^{r}e^{-c s}\,\mathrm{d}W(s),$$ and' counterpart by 

and denote its 'regulated' counterpart by

(3.2) Jθ(r) := ecr Kθ(r) + sup
$$J_{\theta}(r):=\mathrm{e}^{cr}\left\{K_{\theta}(r)+\sup_{r^{\prime}\leq r}[-K_{\theta}(r^{\prime})]_{+}\right\}.$$  It for the case $k=1$ under which the model (2.1)

We first provide a result for the case k = 1, under which the model (2.1) reduces to
(3.3) yt = [α + βyt−1 + ut]+.

Theorem 3.1. Suppose Assumptions A1 and A2 *hold with* k = 1 in (2.1)*. Then on* D[0, 1],

(3.4) T
$$T^{-1/2}y_{[r T]}\stackrel{d}{\rightarrow}J_{\theta}(r).$$
The preceding is a new result, which relates to some of the previous literature as follows.

(i) The supremum in the definition of Jθ(·) guarantees non-negativity of the limiting process: if Kθ(r) is negative, [−Kθ(r)]+ = −Kθ(r) > 0, so that Kθ(r) +
supr 0≤r
[−Kθ(r 0)]+ ≥ 0. The appearance of the supremum is in line with the solution to the Skorokhod reflection problem (Revuz and Yor, 1999, p. 239).

(ii) Suppose that a = b0 = 0. Then ecrKθ(r) = Sc(r) = σR r 0 e c(r−s) dW(s), an Ornstein–
Uhlenbeck process with autoregressive parameter c (e.g. Chan and Wei, 1987; Phillips, 1987b), and (3.4) specialises to

$$T^{-1/2}y_{[r T]}\stackrel{d}{\rightarrow}S_{c}(r)+\operatorname*{sup}_{r^{\prime}\leq r}[-\mathrm{e}^{c(r-r^{\prime})}S_{c}(r^{\prime})]_{+}.$$

on D[0, 1]. Whereas, if we take εt = utin (2.7), the limited autoregressive process
(2.7)–(2.9) satisfies

$$T^{-1/2}x_{[r T]}\stackrel{d}{\rightarrow}S_{c}(r)+\operatorname*{sup}_{r^{\prime}\leq r}[-S_{c}(r^{\prime})]_{+}$$

on *D[0,* 1]. Comparing the two preceding limits, we observe a subtle but crucial differ-

ence, due to the presence of the factor ec(r−r 0).

(iii) When a = b0 = c = 0, Jθ(r) coincides with a Brownian motion regulated from below at zero, which has the same distribution as a Brownian motion reflected at the origin, |W(·)|, see e.g. Karatzas and Shreve (2012, p. 97). Another model that generates a process with this asymptotic distribution (upon rescaling by T
−1/2) is a first-order threshold autoregression with 'unit root' and 'stationary' regimes, as studied by Liu et al. (2011) and Gao *et al.* (2013). A special case of their model posits

## Xt = Β(Xt−1)Xt−1 + Ut,

where β(x) = 1 if x ≥ 0, and β(x) = 0 otherwise. It follows that xt = [xt−1]+ +ut, and so [xt]+ = [[xt−1]+ + ut]+, which corresponds to our setting (2.1) with α = 0, β = 1, k = 1, and yt = [xt]+. It is thus not surprising that, in this case, our Theorem 3.1 agrees exactly with the corresponding Theorem 3.1 of Liu *et al.* (2011).

When k > 1, the other roots of the lag polynomial B(L) affect the behaviour of {yt}, and we need a further condition to ensure that the first differences {∆yt} are well behaved. Let

$$(3.5)$$
(3.5) Fδ:=
$$F_{\delta}:=\left[\begin{array}{c c c c c}{{\phi_{1}\delta}}&{{\phi_{2}}}&{{\cdot\cdot\cdot}}&{{\phi_{k-2}}}&{{\phi_{k-1}}}\\ {{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}\\ {{\delta}}&{{0}}&{{\cdot\cdot\cdot}}&{{0}}&{{0}}\\ {{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}\\ {{0}}&{{1}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}\\ {{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}\\ {{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{}}&{{1}}&{{0}}\end{array}\right]$$
.
Under an appropriate condition on the matrices {Fδ | δ ∈ [0, 1]}, we can ensure {∆yt} is stochastically bounded. To state that, we need the following (cf. Jungers (2009), Defn. 1.1):
Definition. The *joint spectral radius* (JSR) of a bounded collection A of square matrices is

$\mathbf{a}$ = $\mathbf{a}$. 
λJSR(A) := lim sup n→∞
sup M∈An λ(M)
1/n where λ(M) denotes the spectral radius of M, and An:= {Qn i=1 Ai| Ai *∈ A}*.

Control over the JSR has been previously used to ensure the stationarity of regime-switching autoregressive models (e.g., Liebscher (2005); Saikkonen (2008)), and we shall utilise it in a similar manner here.

## Assumption A4. Λjsr({F0, F1}) < 1.

Approximate upper bounds for the JSR can be computed numerically, to an arbitrarily high degree of accuracy, via semidefinite programming (Parrilo and Jadbabaie, 2008), making it reasonably straightforward to verify whether this condition is satisfied by given parameter values. The following result, which is proved in Appendix C, provides a sufficient condition for A4, which may be checked even more simply.

Lemma 3.1. If Pk−1 i=1 |φi| < 1, then Assumption A4 is satisfied.

Remark 3.1. Assumption A4 implies that all the eigenvalues of F1 must be below 1 in modulus, and thus that the all roots of φ(z) lie strictly outside the unit circle (see e.g. Hamilton, 1994, Prop. 1.1). (Since φ(0) = 1, it also follows that φ(1) > 0.)
However, as illustrated by Example 1 in Appendix C, merely requiring that φ(z) have only stationary roots is not sufficient to guarantee the convergence (in distribution) of T
−1/2ybrTc.

Due to the nonlinearity in the model it may be possible to induce explosive trajectories for both ∆yt and yt, via a sucession of periods in which yt > 0 alternates with yt = 0 (see Figure C.1a). Thus additional conditions, such as A4, are needed to exclude such behaviour.

On the other hand, as illustrated by Example 2 in Appendix C, neither is Assumption A4 necessary for the convergence of T
−1/2ybrTc. Finding a necessary condition thus remains a challenging open question.

Theorem 3.2. Suppose Assumptions A1–A4 *hold. Then*

(3.6) T
$$T^{-1/2}y_{[r T]}\stackrel{d}{\rightarrow}\phi(1)^{-1}J_{\theta_{\phi}}(r)=:Y_{\theta_{\phi}}(r)$$
on D[0, 1]*, where* θφ := [a, φ(1)b0, φ(1)−1c].

The principal difference between Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 is that when k > 1, the stationary dynamics appear in the limit via the factor φ(1). Notably, the local autoregressive parameter c is replaced by φ(1)−1c - exactly as it would be if {yt} were generated by a linear autoregression with a root local to unity (cf. Hansen, 1999, p. 599). Indeed, φ(1) = 1 when k = 1, so in this case the two results coincide.

Corollary 3.1. *For the Tobit model* (2.3) *with censoring point* L, T
−1/2y˜brTcd→ Yθ˜φ
(r)*, where*
˜θφ := [˜*a, φ*(1)˜b0, φ(1)−1c].

3.2. OLS estimates. We first consider the case where k = 1, as in the model (3.3), to develop intuition for our results.

When estimating (3.3) by OLS, we need to decide which deterministic terms should be included in the regression. In the absence of censoring, i.e. if the data generating process were simply a linear autoregression, the inclusion of a constant and a linear trend would render the distribution of the OLS estimator of β free of any nuisance parameters related to the deterministic components.2 Unfortunately, the nonlinearity introduced by the censoring entails that α - or rather, the local parameter a - will show up in the limiting distribution of βˆT , *irrespective* of which deterministics are included in the regression. To permit inferences to also be drawn on a, if required, we consider the OLS regression of yt on a constant and yt−1, i.e.

$$\begin{bmatrix}\hat{\alpha}_{T}\\ \hat{\beta}_{T}\end{bmatrix}:=\left(\sum_{t=1}^{T}\begin{bmatrix}1&y_{t-1}\\ y_{t-1}&y_{t-1}^{2}\end{bmatrix}\right)^{-1}\sum_{t=1}^{T}\begin{bmatrix}1\\ y_{t-1}\end{bmatrix}y_{t}=:\mathcal{M}_{T}^{-1}m_{T}.$$
$$(3.7)$$
(3.7) "αˆT
In the stationary dynamic Tobit model, OLS is inconsistent (see e.g., Bykhovskaya, 2023, Supplementary Material, Lemma B.1). However, as the following shows, when β is local to unity, consistency is restored. The reason is that observations in the vicinity of zero accumulate only at rate T
1/2, so that a vanishingly small fraction of the sample is affected by the censoring.

Theorem 3.3. Suppose Assumptions A1 and A2 *hold, with* k = 1 in (2.1)*. Then*

$$\begin{bmatrix}T^{1/2}(\hat{\alpha}_{T}-\alpha)\\ T(\hat{\beta}_{T}-\beta)\end{bmatrix}\stackrel{{d}}{{\to}}\begin{bmatrix}1&\int_{0}^{1}J_{\theta}(r)\,\mathrm{d}r\\ J_{0}^{1}J_{\theta}(r)\,\mathrm{d}r&\int_{0}^{1}J_{\theta}^{2}(r)\,\mathrm{d}r\end{bmatrix}^{-1}\begin{bmatrix}J_{\theta}(1)-c\int_{0}^{1}J_{\theta}(r)\,\mathrm{d}r-b_{0}-a\\ \sigma\int_{0}^{1}J_{\theta}(r)\,\mathrm{d}W(r)\end{bmatrix}$$ $$=:\mathcal{J}_{\theta}^{-1}\mathcal{U}_{\theta}=:\begin{bmatrix}\mathbf{a}_{\theta}\\ \mathbf{b}_{\theta}\end{bmatrix}.$$
$$(3.8)$$

2Strictly speaking, this is true only if the autoregressive model is formulated in 'unobserved components' form
(see e.g. Andrews and Chen (1994, Section 2.1) as yt = µ + δt + y
∗
ty
∗
t = βy∗
t−1 + ut so that the presence (or absence) of a linear drift in yt is independent of the value of β, and so can always be removed by deterministic detrending. By contrast, if the model is formulated 'directly' as yt = α + βyt−1 + ut, then the linear trend that is present when β = 1 becomes an exponential trend when β is local to unity. In the present (censored) setting, we may note that (3.3) is not equivalent to yt = [µ + δt + y
∗
t
]+ y
∗
t = βy∗
t−1 + ut.

(This model is in fact the *latent* dynamic Tobit referred to in Section 1.)